![javascript logo clipart 10 free Cliparts \| Download images on
\...](./images/media/image1.jpeg){width="2.0in"
height="1.773685476815398in"}![](./images/media/image2.png){width="2.0995866141732282in"
height="1.77in"}

## About this Course {#about-this-course .unnumbered}

This course introduces the programming language JavaScript and shows the
websites that include the type of interactions students will eventually
be able to develop. Learners will understand the importance of how
JavaScript was developed and why such history impacts the way JavaScript
is currently written and in future releases. Learners will write their
first scripts, have their HTML and CSS skills assessed, create variables
and arrays and assign values to them. If student's skills are lacking,
resources and recommendations are provided to improve these skills.
There is ample opportunity for students to practice these first, core
skills.

# Syllabus {#syllabus .unnumbered}

### Week 1 {#week-1 .unnumbered}

### Getting Started, Introduction to JavaScript, Variables, and Arrays {#getting-started-introduction-to-javascript-variables-and-arrays .unnumbered}

In this module, you will be introduced to JavaScript and what it can do.
You will be able to identify websites that include the types of
interactions you will be able to produce at the end of the entire
Specialization. You will also be able to discuss the history of
JavaScript and explore why this history impacts how we write JavaScript.
On the web, JavaScript is used to manipulate the HTML and CSS of a
webpage, after it has loaded from the server. You will be able to assess
your understanding of HTML and CSS and have the opportunity through
resources and recommendations for improving your skills in this area, if
necessary. You will write simple JavaScript statements in the web
browser console and be able to create variables and arrays. You will be
able to assign values to these variables and arrays and be able to read
values from them.

### 12 videos, 5 readings {#videos-5-readings .unnumbered}

-   1.00.A Note From UC Davis

-   [1.00.Welcome/Intro to this
    Course!](https://www.coursera.org/lecture/javascript-basics/welcome-to-this-course-EGMim)

1.  Introduction to JavaScript - Part 1

2.  Introduction to JavaScript - Part 2

3.  Introduction to JavaScript - Part 3

4.  Tools Needed for Success

5.  Skills Needed for Success

-   1.05.Additional Resources

6.  JavaScript Variables

7.  JavaScript Variables Practice - Part 1

8.  JavaScript Variables Practice - Part 2

9.  JavaScript Variables Practice - Part 3

10. JavaScript Arrays - Part 1

11. JavaScript Arrays - Part 2

12. JavaScript Arrays Practice

-   1.12.Additional Resources

-   1.12.Module 1 Reflection

# Week 2 {#week-2 .unnumbered}

## Controlling Logical Flow in JavaScript {#controlling-logical-flow-in-javascript .unnumbered}

In this module, you will be able to download, install and use of a code
editor as a tool for writing code, and properly save and manage their
files. You will be introduced to the selection control structure. This
basic control structure allows programs to follow a path based on
conditions, and is one of the three major logic and flow control
structures found in any modern programming language. You will be able to
identify, write, and trouble shoot scripts using this basic control
structure. You will be able to correctly identify loop structures and
practice using some of the syntax available in JavaScript to create
loops. You will then be able to put all three logical flow control
structures (sequence, selection, and loop) together to create basic
JavaScript programs that can be tested. Finally you will be able to
combine sets of program instructions into named functions and create
custom functions that can be called to complete the instructions they
contain.

### 25 videos, 5 readings {#videos-5-readings-1 .unnumbered}

1.  [Module 2
    Introduction](https://www.coursera.org/lecture/javascript-basics/module-2-introduction-8y2ue)

2.  Visual Studio - Part 1

3.  Visual Studio - Part 2

4.  Visual Studio - Part 3

5.  Operators, Booleans & Selection in JavaScript

6.  Try This!

7.  Comparing Values

8.  Else If

9.  Switch Statements

10. Using &&

-   2.10.Additional Resources

11. Loops in JavaScript

12. Working With Arrays

13. The For..Of Loop

14. While Loops

-   2.14.JavaScript-LoopsAdditional Resource

15. Structured Programming, Sequence - Part 1

16. Sequence - Part 2

17. Sequence - Part 3, Loop

18. Loop + Selection

-   2.18.JavaScript Basic Challenges Introduction

19. JavaScript Basic Challenges 01-09

20. Functions in JavaScript

21. Passing In and Returning Data

22. Useful Example - Step 1

23. Useful Example - Steps 2-4

24. Useful Example - Step 5

25. More On Functions

-   2.25.Additional Resource

-   2.25.JavaScript Function Challenges 10-16

-   2.25.Module 2 Reflection

# Week 3 {#week-3 .unnumbered}

## Using JavaScript in the Web Browser {#using-javascript-in-the-web-browser .unnumbered}

In this module, you will be introduced to the methods built into
JavaScript for accessing and manipulating DOM elements in the web
browser. You will be able to capture user events with JavaScript and use
those events to trigger changes to the DOM using the document methods
and element properties. You will be able to identify how scope works in
JavaScript and be introduced to best practices for working with
variables in JavaScript so that scope does not become a problem. You
will be able to practice all the skills and techniques learned so far in
the course by putting together a simple slideshow on a web page.

### 37 videos, 7 readings {#videos-7-readings .unnumbered}

1.  [Module 3
    Introduction](https://www.coursera.org/lecture/javascript-basics/module-3-introduction-xK7aE)

2.  JavaScript and the DOM

3.  Dot Syntax and Methods

4.  DOM: getElementsByTagName();

5.  DOM: getElementsByClassName();

6.  DOM: querySelector();

7.  DOM: querySelectorAll();

8.  innerHTML

9.  className

10. Creating Elements and Text Nodes

11. Video: Removing Elements

-   3.11.Additional Resource

-   3.11.JavaScript DOM Challenges 17-21

12. Capturing Events with JavaScript

13. Event Listeners

14. The Event Object

15. More On Events

16. Mouseover, Mouseover Events: HTML

17. Scroll Events: HTML

18. deo: Window Resizing

19. Key Down Event

-   3.19.Additional Resources

20. JavaScript Event Challenges 22-30

21. Scope in JavaScript

22. Strategy 1: Never Use Global Scope

23. Strategy 2: \"use strict;\"

24. Strategy 3: const and let

25. Scope in JavaScript Summary

-   3.25.Additional Resources

-   3.25.Simple Slide Show Start Files

26. Simple JS Slideshow - Part 1

27. Simple JS Slideshow - Part 2

28. Simple JS Slideshow - Part 3

29. Simple JS Slideshow - Part 4

30. Simple JS Slideshow - Part 5

-   3.30.Discussion Prompt: Simple JS Slideshow Open Discussion

-   3.30.Advanced Slide Show Start Files

31. Slideshow with Cross Fade Effect - Part 1

32. Slideshow with Cross Fade Effect - Part 2

33. Slideshow with Cross Fade Effect - Part 3

34. Slideshow with Cross Fade Effect - Part 4

35. Slideshow with Cross Fade Effect - Part 5

36. Slideshow with Cross Fade Effect - Part 6

37. Slideshow with Cross Fade Effect - Part 7

-   3.37.Slideshow With Cross Fade Effect Open Discussion

-   3.37.Prompt: Module 3 Reflection

# Week 4 {#week-4 .unnumbered}

## Basic JavaScript Application Projects {#basic-javascript-application-projects .unnumbered}

In this module, you will be able to apply and practice the skills and
techniques you have learned in the course by building a basic and a more
advanced distance converter. You will be able to further apply and
practice to extend your skills and techniques by building a simple
vacation destination list application.

### 26 videos, 4 readings {#videos-4-readings .unnumbered}

1.  [Module 4
    Introduction](https://www.coursera.org/lecture/javascript-basics/module-4-introduction-FqHR0)

    -   4.01.Basic Distance Converter Start Files

2.  Basic Distance Converter Project - Part 1

3.  Basic Distance Converter Project - Part 2

4.  Basic Distance Converter Project - Part 3

5.  Basic Distance Converter Project - Part 4

6.  Basic Distance Converter Project - Part 5

    -   4.06.Basic Distance Converter Project Open Discussion

    -   4.06.Advanced Distance Converter Start Files

7.  Advanced Distance Converter Project - Part 1

8.  Advanced Distance Converter Project - Part 2

9.  Advanced Distance Converter Project - Part 3

10. Advanced Distance Converter Project - Part 4

11. Advanced Distance Converter Project - Part 5

    -   4.11.Advanced Distance Converter Project Open Discussion

    -   4.11.Vacation Desitnation Project - Part 1 Start Files

12. Vacation Destination Project: HTML & CSS - Part 1

13. Vacation Destination Project: HTML & CSS - Part 2

14. Vacation Destination Project: HTML & CSS - Part 3

15. Vacation Destination Project: HTML & CSS - Part 4

16. Vacation Destination Project: HTML & CSS - Part 5

17. Vacation Destination Project: HTML & CSS - Part 6

    -   4.17.Vacation Destination Project: Part 1 Open Discussion

    -   4.17.Vacation Destination Project - Part 2 Start Files

18. Vacation Destination Project: JavaScript - Part 1

19. Vacation Destination Project: JavaScript - Part 2

20. Vacation Destination Project: JavaScript - Part 3

21. Vacation Destination Project: JavaScript - Part 4

22. Vacation Destination Project: JavaScript - Part 5

23. Vacation Destination Project: JavaScript - Part 6

24. Vacation Destination Project: JavaScript - Part 7

25. Vacation Destination Project: JavaScript - Part 8

    -   4.25.Vacation Destination Project: Part 2 Open Discussion

    -   4.25.Module 4 Reflection

26. Course Summary

-   4.26.Self-Reflection

# A Note From UC Davis {#a-note-from-uc-davis .unnumbered}

### Welcome to this course! {#welcome-to-this-course .unnumbered}

We are delighted to be a part of your continuing education. This course
will provide you with a variety of tools and learning opportunities, to
include video lectures, readings, assessments, peer reviews, and an
opportunity to contribute to the Coursera learning community in the
discussion forums.

In each of the lesson sections, you'll find learning objectives, lecture
videos, readings, activities, and an opportunity to test your knowledge
in quiz format. In some of the module sections you'll also work on
assignments and grade the work of your peers. A peer-review assignment,
is one where you and your fellow learners have an opportunity to review
and grade each other's work. We'll dive more into peer reviews later on
in this course.

When navigating the course, you can find available **course resources**
under each of the lecture videos in a section labeled
"[Downloads]{.underline}" -- here you can download the lecture video,
view transcripts, PDFs of the lecture slides, and **find additional
readings or files**.

If you run into any issues during this course, **learner support** is
available to all Coursera students. The link for Coursera's Learner
support is included below. The [Help Center/Learner
Support](https://learner.coursera.help/hc/en-us)

includes topics such as account setup, payments, enrollment questions,
and troubleshooting common problems.

If you find any content issues, be sure to let the course staff know by
**flagging the lecture**, assignment, reading, or quiz and this will
inform us of where these issues occur. Here is the link for more
information on how to [Flag an
Issue](https://learner.coursera.help/hc/en-us/articles/208280106-Report-a-problem-with-a-course)

\- it is also listed below.

One of the great things about Coursera courses is that they are
self-paced. The course dates are based on the average time it takes to
complete a course. However, if you need additional time to complete a
course you can **reset your deadlines** with no penalties. More
information on resetting deadlines can be found here: [Assignment
Deadlines](https://learner.coursera.help/hc/en-us/articles/208279866-Assignment-deadlines)

Need additional help during your course session? Be sure to utilize the
**discussion forums** and interact with your fellow peers. In this area,
you can ask questions or search for similar issues that have already
been posted in the forums. Learner support is also a great place to find
answers, but specific course content questions can typically be found
and answered in the discussion forums. This is also a great place to
post your assignment if additional peer reviews are needed. Here is a
link with more information on the discussion forums: [Discussion
Forums](https://learner.coursera.help/hc/en-us/articles/208279996-Get-help-with-course-content-in-the-discussion-forums)

Because of the self-paced nature of Coursera courses, this is an
excellent opportunity to show your commitment to your work and the work
of your peers through academic integrity. Be sure to read the Coursera
guidelines and the **Coursera Honor Code** here: [Coursera Honor
Code](https://learner.coursera.help/hc/en-us/articles/209818863-Coursera-Honor-Code)

We look forward to having you in this course. Happy learning!

***UC Davis Coursera Team***

## **Additional Links**: {#additional-links .unnumbered}

#### Coursera's Learner Support/Help Center: {#courseras-learner-supporthelp-center .unnumbered}

<https://learner.coursera.help/hc/en-us>

#### Flagging a Lecture: {#flagging-a-lecture .unnumbered}

<https://learner.coursera.help/hc/en-us/articles/208280106-Report-a-problem-with-a-course>

#### Assignment Deadlines:  {#assignment-deadlines .unnumbered}

<https://learner.coursera.help/hc/en-us/articles/208279866-Assignment-deadlines>

#### Peer Reviewed Assignments: {#peer-reviewed-assignments .unnumbered}

<https://learner.coursera.help/hc/en-us/sections/201895903-Peer-reviewed-assignments>

#### Coursera's Honor Code: {#courseras-honor-code .unnumbered}

<https://learner.coursera.help/hc/en-us/articles/209818863-Coursera-Honor-Code>

# Week One:  {#week-one .unnumbered}

# 1.00 Welcome to JavaScript Basics (1.01) {#welcome-to-javascript-basics-1.01 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image3.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.261538713910761in"}

Hello, and welcome to our course on JavaScript. My name is Bill Mead,
and I\'ve been teaching and learning about JavaScript for many years.
Here I am in California, outside on this beautiful day not that many
miles away from where JavaScript was invented over 25 years ago. It\'s a
fun programming language, I think you\'ll enjoy learning it. It can be
frustrating and maddening at times when you can\'t get it to work, but
when you do get things to work the way you want them to work, it\'s
super satisfying. It\'s become one of the most popular programming
languages in the planet.

As we go through this course and through this specialization, I think
you\'ll start to understand why it\'s satisfying and easy to get started
with and if you\'re new to programming, don\'t worry, we\'re going to
start at the very beginning and get you going all on the right track.
Buckle in and let\'s get started learning JavaScript.

# 1.00. Week 1 Introduction (0:57) {#week-1-introduction-057 .unnumbered}

Welcome to the first module on JavaScript. In this module we\'ll get
into the basics of the language. We\'ll talk about variables and arrays
and these kinds of things that you see in a lot of programming
languages. But we\'ll also talk about the history of JavaScript and do a
real introduction to the language. And the history of JavaScript is
super interesting because it has an impact on how we write JavaScript.
And that\'s really interesting to see how a language has evolved and
developed and how that affects the way you write modern, up to date
JavaScript. And I think you\'ll learn a lot from this and you\'ll be
able to do some interesting things with JavaScript as you go along. So
stick with me and we will have a lot of fun in this first module
learning about JavaScript in the basics of the language.

# Intro to JavaScript -- Part 1 (3:13)

![](./images/media/image4.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.261538713910761in"}

Unlike a pillbox which really can\'t hold much more than just pills, you
can put anything into an array in JavaScript.

![](./images/media/image5.png){width="5.0in"
height="2.8269225721784776in"}

You can even put in an array and an array. You think about a pillbox
with a sub-container with even smaller divisions in it.

![](./images/media/image6.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.0544870953630796in"}

Let\'s take a look at what that looks like. Let me switch back over to
my tab here. I\'m just going to paste this in, but you might want to
type it. It\'s a little bit hard to type and get right, but it\'s worth
trying if you can. I\'m going to paste this vehicle\'s array in here.

![](./images/media/image7.png){width="3.5in"
height="2.138140857392826in"}![](./images/media/image8.png){width="3.5in"
height="2.138140857392826in"}

Now if I do, if I want to access an element from this array, I could do
vehicles, square bracket one. That\'s going to go and get the line that
starts with which element. There we go. Then, it\'s going to give me
this because this is zero, and now this is one. Right? It\'s going to
get me that into that sub-array. You can see it\'s sort of showing up
down there. Then if I do square bracket two, that\'s going to get me the
explorer elements in that sub-array. You can do things like that with
arrays.

That\'s kind of complicated and you\'re not probably going to be doing
arrays inside of arrays to start off with. But it\'s an important thing
to understand about arrays is that they\'re very flexible tools that you
can use to hold groups of data, and that\'s very useful.

![](./images/media/image9.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.0544870953630796in"}

Another thing that\'s interesting is that a regular variable holding a
string can be treated as an array in JavaScript. If I make a variable
var joke equals the chicken crossed the road, now I\'ve got a variable
called joke, but I can actually treat it as an array. I could do. Joke
square bracket four, and that\'s going to get me the C in chicken.
Because zero, one, two, three, four is going to get me that C in
chicken. Or I could do, joke dot length, and it will tell me that there
are 28 characters in that string. That\'s kind of an interesting thing
to understand about arrays as well.

# Intro to JavaScript -- Part 2 (6:41)

![](./images/media/image10.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.261538713910761in"}

A great place to go to find some websites that will show you the way
JavaScript can interact with the website is this Awwwards website with
the extra w\'s in here.

![](./images/media/image11.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.0544870953630796in"}

I have that website pulled up over here. You can come here and look
through some of the different sites that have won awards on
awwwards.com. <https://www.awwwards.com/>. They tend to be pretty
innovative and interesting sites.

![](./images/media/image12.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.0544870953630796in"}

I have this one (<https://www.awwwards.com/sites/taptaro>). Whether
you\'re talking about following the mouse, or coming over here and the
animation around the circle, or the way these images pop in, this is all
being done with JavaScript, this kind of thing.

![](./images/media/image13.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.0544870953630796in"}

Then here we are in one of the NASA spacecraft website here (no longer
active). Click on one of these things it will come up and show you the
different pictures and give you some other interactions including some
sounds as you work around it.

![](./images/media/image14.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.0544870953630796in"}

Or this website (<https://boyntonyards.com/>) over here which as you
scroll through does some interesting interactions as you\'re scrolling
through the website, that kind of stuff.

![](./images/media/image15.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.0544870953630796in"}

Yeah, look around on the web and wherever you see interactions
happening, whether it\'s a map like this or all kinds of interactions
are being created by JavaScript. You\'ve seen some interactions and
websites and you\'ve probably seen plenty of others in other websites or
you\'ve gone off and found your own.

![](./images/media/image16.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.0544870953630796in"}

But let\'s talk about some other reasons why we should learn JavaScript.
First of all, it\'s the most popular programming language in the world.

There\'s also a low barrier of entry to the field. Whereas if you\'re
learning Java, or C, or C++, you\'re going to need a lot of experience
before you can get to a really good paying job. But JavaScript in the
web is the gateway to programming into the tech industry in this way.
It\'s really good to learn JavaScript for that reason.

Then finally, it is the language of the web. Now it goes well beyond the
web. We have Raspberry Pi and other devices that can all be programmed
with JavaScript robots and all kinds of things where JavaScript exists.
The Unity gaming engine uses JavaScript as well as C#. There are lots of
places where you can use JavaScript, but it is ultimately the language
of the web. It is the programming, the scripting language for the web
browser, and it\'s native to the web browser. That\'s a really great
place to start with programming.

![](./images/media/image17.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.0544870953630796in"}

The story of JavaScript is really interesting. It really is the story of
an underdog who became king. JavaScript didn\'t start off as the most
popular programming language. It\'s really important to understand this
path that JavaScript has taken through history because it has a big
impact on how we write JavaScript. JavaScript was written by this
gentleman here, Brendan Eich, in 1995 over the course of 10 days while
he was working at Netscape. I\'m not going to go into great detail on
the history here, but it\'s a really good thing to look up. It\'s a very
interesting story in and of itself. But he wrote the language in a very
short amount of time and that\'s an important thing to understand about
this language.

Another important thing to understand about the JavaScript programming
language is it\'s not the same language as Java. It was originally a
language called Mocha and they changed the name to JavaScript, really as
a marketing ploy. But it\'s not actually the same language as Java,
they\'re two completely different languages. It\'s easy as a beginner to
get confused between Java and JavaScript.

![](./images/media/image18.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.0544870953630796in"}

As I said before, JavaScript had some rough beginnings. The early years
of JavaScript were plagued by bad implementations, developers who just
despised the language mostly due to poor documentation and it was
greatly misunderstood as a language. This gentleman, Douglas Crockford,
did a lot to help people understand the incredible value of JavaScript
as a language and its strengths as well as its weaknesses.

![](./images/media/image19.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.0544870953630796in"}

He wrote a book called JavaScript: The Good Parts. It\'s a legendary
book because in this book he really talks about how JavaScript has some
of the best features any programming language has ever had right
alongside some of the worst features. Becoming a good JavaScript
developer is about understanding how to leverage the best parts of the
language while minimizing the worst parts of the language. We\'ll be
seeing some examples of some parts of the language that are good and
not-so-good right off the bat, and I\'ll be pointing those out.

You\'ll see that as we go along, we write JavaScript in ways to minimize
the bad features of the language. When I say bad features, what I mean
are features that can lead to more errors, lead to confusion in the
programming, and so on and so forth. But it\'s also a very expressive
language, it\'s a very powerful language. Some of the ideas behind it
are very interesting and very powerful, even though they\'re different
from other languages, which was behind some of the frustration that
people had with it initially is they just didn\'t understand it because
it was different.

# Intro to JavaScript -- Part 3 (5:33)

![](./images/media/image20.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.261538713910761in"}

It\'s really important to understand the development of JavaScript over
the years, and this is because the way JavaScript is developed has
really impacted the way that we write JavaScript.

![](./images/media/image21.png){width="5.0in"
height="2.823183508311461in"}

So having a little bit of understanding of this history is really
important as you learn the language. Again, I\'m just going to cover
just the very basics, but there\'s a lot of this history. It\'s a
fascinating history and worth looking into if you\'re interested in that
kind of thing and you can find out about it by looking it up on the web
where there\'s plenty of books about it and that kind of stuff.

We know that JavaScript was originally written in 1995 in 10 days by
Brendan Eich and his team at Netscape. Then in 1997, the first version
of the standard was released, and the standard is created by the
European Computer Manufacturers Association. Essentially the people in
California went to Europe to this association to get this language
rubber-stamped. It didn\'t turn out to be quite that easy, but that\'s a
longer story. But in 1997, the first version, **ECMAScript 1,** was
standardized and released, and then a third version.

The second version never really quite happened, but the third version
came out in 1999 with some minor changes and fixes. The fourth version
is an interesting story and one that I won\'t go into great depth on,
but again, you can look it up for yourself. But essentially, if you\'ll
recall, I had said earlier that there was a lot of arguing about the
direction of JavaScript and there were a lot of developers that didn\'t
really understand it. There was some push to make JavaScript more like
other programming languages that we\'re already familiar with and
comfortable with. Douglas Crockford really stepped in and said,\" Wait,
look, JavaScript is its own language and it has its own powerful
features in its own right and if you understand it and make use of that
power then it really is valuable to keep it the way it is\". It took a
while for him to convince people of that.

But in 2009, they released **ECMAScript 5**, and **ECMAScript 4** was
scrapped. They started to go a different direction entirely and then
they scrapped that direction entirely. They released **ECMAScript 5** in
2009. This is the version that when it was released, everybody had kind
of come together around the table and said, \"JavaScript is going to be
the scripting language for the web\". Because everybody had agreed with
that, this is when JavaScript really took off and made it past its
troubled beginnings and its difficult beginnings was here in 2009. In
2009 is when JavaScript became King of the web because all of the major
players agreed that this is going to be the scripting language, the
programming language of the web. They built in a lot of features.
There\'s a lot that\'s built into **ECMAScript 5** that we\'ll be using
throughout this course.

Over the next 10 years, there was a lot of work on JavaScript. They
really wanted to move it from being a scripting language to a general
all-purpose language, something that was very powerful. In 2015,
**ES6**, what is commonly referred to as **ES6**, was released,
sometimes it\'s called **ECMAScript 2015**. These two terms are
interchangeable, but **ES6** was released and it\'s a big release, a lot
changed and a lot was added, and a lot of JavaScript has been made more
powerful and turned into a more general all purpose programming
language. A lot of what you\'ll be learning in this course are pieces
from the **2009 ECMAScript 5** standard and pieces from the **ECMAScript
2015 ES6** standard together, which really make up the major part of
JavaScript.

Since 2015, the standardizing body has been in a nice cadence of
releasing new versions each year. From then on, instead of calling it
**ES7** and **ES8** and that kind of stuff, they stuck with the year.
They came out with **ECMAScript 2016, ECMAScript 2017**, and so on and
so forth. In each year there are smaller new additions added, but on the
whole, these additions are fairly small and they are being more advanced
pieces that we won\'t see nearly as much of in this course because this
is a beginner\'s course, but we will be doing a lot with **ECMAScript
5** and **ES6** or **ECMAScript 2015**. Dive in and I hope you enjoy
learning about JavaScript as we go along here.

# Tools Needed for Success (3:40)

![](./images/media/image22.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.261538713910761in"}

Tools and skills needed for success for learning JavaScript.

![](./images/media/image23.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.258546587926509in"}

First, we\'ll talk about software and then we\'ll talk a little bit
about hardware.

![](./images/media/image24.png){width="3.5in"
height="1.8064632545931758in"}![](./images/media/image25.png){width="3.5in"
height="1.8064632545931758in"}![](./images/media/image26.png){width="5.0in"
height="2.9594017935258092in"}

The first thing you\'re going to need in order to work with JavaScript
and write JavaScript is a good code editor, and I recommend using Visual
Studio Code. Not to be confused with Visual Studio product, but Visual
Studio Code, and I have that in this browser tab here. You can download
that for Mac or for Windows, or I believe also for Linux you can get
Visual Studio Code. It\'s a really good code editor. It\'s very popular
these days. There are plenty of other code editors out there.

![](./images/media/image27.png){width="3.5in"
height="2.435042650918635in"}![](./images/media/image28.png){width="3.5in"
height="2.435042650918635in"}

You could use Atom, you could use Sublime Text, even if you have
Dreamweaver, you could use that as a code editor.

![](./images/media/image29.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.073718285214348in"}

Dreamweaver has a lot of other stuff built into it that you don\'t need,
but it works perfectly fine as code editor if you want to use that as
well.

![](./images/media/image30.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.259401793525809in"}

The second thing you\'re going to need is a web browser, and I\'m going
to recommend that you use **Chrome**. **Chrome** has a lot of the
developer tools that developers use. They\'re built right into
**Chrome** and they\'re easy to access. You can also use **Safari** or
**Firefox** or **Microsoft Edge** or **Brave**. There are other browsers
out there as well and many of them also have developer tools, but most
developers use **Chrome** and get comfortable with the **Chrome**
developer tools. So I recommend that you download **Chrome** and use
that browser. Do NOT use **IE** or **Edge** developed by Microsoft.
Unless you LOVE advertisements and poor coding techniques.

![](./images/media/image31.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.259401793525809in"}

You\'re also going to need an image editor. If you have access to
Photoshop, that\'s great. Photoshop is fantastic for this kind of thing,
but if you don\'t have access to Photoshop, there\'s another one called
GIMP, which is free.

![](./images/media/image32.png){width="5.0in"
height="2.824251968503937in"}

You can go download **GIMP** and I have that pulled up here. You can
actually download **GIMP** for Mac or for Windows and that kind of
stuff. **IrfanView** is even better & easier. There are also online
tools, webpages that will allow you to upload your image and optimize it
for the web and do some different kinds of image editing right through
your browser. You might find some of those types of tools as well, but
you will need some image editor to help you working with images. That\'s
a nice to have. It\'s not absolutely necessary, but it\'s really nice to
have.

![](./images/media/image33.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.06965769903762in"}

Next, you\'re going to need a computer and internet access. It may sound
obvious that you\'re going to need internet access to do an internet
class, but you are going to need that and you will need a computer,
whether it\'s a laptop or desktop.

What\'s not going to work very well is either a Chromebook or a tablet
or a phone. You\'re really going to need something that you can write
code on and save files to. iOS you can make it work, but it\'s not
really up to the task. You\'ll be fighting it every step along the way.
You want to be working with **Mac OS X** or **Windows 10** on a computer
in order to really make this work.

# Skills needed for Success (5:38)

![](./images/media/image34.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.261538713910761in"}

Let\'s talk about some of the skills you need in order to be successful
learning JavaScript.

![](./images/media/image35.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.06965769903762in"}

**First and foremost**, you need to be able to type. I mean typing with
10 fingers without looking at your fingers, touch typing. And it will
really help you to be able to do this. If you\'re somebody who hunts in
packs with one finger or two fingers, you may be pretty fast at it. But
it really will slow you down for programming. And so I recommend that
you do some online typing programs. There\'s plenty of places online
where you can learn how to type. You don\'t have to be terribly fast at
typing. But you do need to be accurate. Or if you\'re not accurate with
typing, you have to at least stop and go back and fix every single
error. And I have known a lot of students over the years that struggle a
lot with typing. And it really impedes their ability to learn something
like JavaScript. So I recommend that you get those keyboarding skills if
you don\'t have them already.

![](./images/media/image36.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.06965769903762in"}

The **second** thing that you need is you need to be able to manage your
files. That means when you save a file on your computer, you know where
it is. Not just going into the file menu and choosing the most recent
files thing. If that\'s what you do to find your files, then you need to
get good at file management. And if your desktop looks like the picture
here, then you\'re going to be in trouble. Make sure you\'re comfortable
with saving files into folders. And you know how to do that and where
those folders are on the web, everything is linked. So if a file cannot
be found, if a file is not in the right place, then your project will
break. And we don\'t want that to happen. So make sure you clean up all
of your files. And work with a clean desktop. And for every project, you
should have a folder and all the files you need for that project should
be in that folder.

![](./images/media/image37.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.06965769903762in"}

The **third** thing that you need is persistence. Learning JavaScript is
not easy. It\'s challenging and maybe that\'s true for every programming
language. But JavaScript in particular it\'s got some quirks to it and
it takes some getting used to. And there will be times when you\'re
frustrated when things aren\'t working the way you think they should.
And you just need to take a break, step away from it and then come back
to it. But come back to it, because it\'s worth learning. And even
though it\'s hard, it\'s definitely worth putting in the effort and
being persistent to get there. I\'ve told many students over the years
if you\'re not banging your head against the wall, you\'re not learning
JavaScript. All my students will tell you that I say that over and over
and over again. And it\'s frustrating especially in that moment when you
realize you just left that one character or semi colon or something like
that, and that broke the entire script. But stick with it, keep working
at it, stay calm, keep pushing forward. And you\'ll make a lot of
progress with it, I promise.

![](./images/media/image38.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.06965769903762in"}

The **fourth** skill that you need is to be good with logic. And logic
is a learned skill. Some people are naturally very logical but it\'s
something that you can practice and develop. And there are lots of tools
and games out there that will help you build your logic skills. Sudoku
is a great place to go for puzzles that will help you build your ability
to use logic. Programmers often use math as well. But math is not that
important to begin with. It\'s really the logic skills that you need.
You might need some basic arithmetic. But I don\'t do a lot of
programming that involves very sophisticated math and a lot of
programmers don\'t. There are programmers that do. But we don\'t need
that in order to get good at JavaScript. But you do need to be good with
logic.

![](./images/media/image39.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.06965769903762in"}

The next thing is, you really should know HTML and CSS as well as you
can. JavaScript manipulates the HTML and CSS that makes up the page.
That\'s how it works, that\'s what it does. And if you don\'t know HTML
and CSS, you don\'t really know what you\'re manipulating. So I
recommend building some skills with HTML and CSS if you don\'t already
have them.

![](./images/media/image40.png){width="5.0in"
height="2.58707239720035in"}

And a good place to go is this Interneting Is Hard website here
(<https://internetishard.com>) . This is a really great tutorial.
They\'ve got a lot of really great, it\'s very simple the way they\'ve
explained things. And they\'ve got a lot of great examples and tutorials
here that will help you with learning HTML and CSS, and it\'s free. So I
recommend going and looking through the Interneting Is Hard website if
you need to get caught up I need you to know in CSS. Well, if you\'ve
never done any HTML and CSS at all, then maybe take a course in HTML and
CSS before diving into JavaScript.

![](./images/media/image41.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

In summary, there\'s a low barrier for entry to this class. The software
is free. You don\'t need a super fast, or super fancy computer. And
getting good at JavaScript can be a ticket to a high paying job, and a
good life. But it\'s not easy. You\'re going to have to work hard to get
there. But it really is worth it if you keep working at it. And I hope
that you continue with us and see all the cool things that you can do
with JavaScript.

## Assessing your Skills in HTML & CSS {#assessing-your-skills-in-html-css .unnumbered}

https://www.coursera.org/learn/javascript-basics/quiz/Ff15D/assessing-your-skills-in-html-css

## Additional Resources {#additional-resources .unnumbered}

### Here are resources related to these lessons: {#here-are-resources-related-to-these-lessons .unnumbered}

-   [Awwwards website](https://www.awwwards.com/)
    https://www.awwwards.com/

-   [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/)
    https://code.visualstudio.com/

-   [Google Chrome](https://www.google.com/chrome/)
    https://www.google.com/chrome/

-   [Adobe Photoshop](https://www.adobe.com/products/photoshop.html)
    https://www.adobe.com/products/photoshop.html

-   [GNU Gimp](https://www.gimp.org/) https://www.gimp.org/

# JavaScript Variables (6:27)

![](./images/media/image42.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.261538713910761in"}

JavaScript variables.

![](./images/media/image43.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

It\'s good practice when programming to write code that is as
generalizable as possible. It allows the code to be reused and helps
limit the effort of writing and maintaining redundant code. Imagine
somebody gave you a robot as a gift to do chores around your house. You
have to teach it how to do your chores.

![](./images/media/image44.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

What if you wanted to teach it to wash the dishes? That would be great.
It will be really helpful to have a robot wash the dishes for you. But
what if you had to write different instructions for each dish in your
house? That would be a lot of dishes and perhaps a lot of instructions.
That wouldn\'t be so great.

![](./images/media/image45.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

What we can do with a variable is that we can treat it as like a
container, and then we can write a set of directions and pass each item
through that set of directions. Here in this diagram, currently, we\'re
going to rinse the food off the silverware and then wash the silverware
with soap and water, and then dry the silverware with towel and then
move on to the next thing which perhaps might be a cup. The red box that
you see here is really the variable. It\'s a temporary container that we
can pass these items through, and we can teach our robot to wash all of
the items one at a time using this container. That will make your
instructions more modular and more reusable and that\'s really helpful.

![](./images/media/image46.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

There are many ways of declaring a variable in JavaScript. We\'ll start
with one of the most basic ways which is using the **var** keyword
**V-A-R**. Here I have a variable called **x**, I\'m creating and
JavaScript will then recognize **x** as a variable and I\'m assigning it
an empty string, two sets of quote marks there followed by a semicolon.
That means that variable x holds an empty string.

On the next example, I have a variable called **cheese** that I\'ve
created, and it\'s holding a string called yummy. The equal sign here is
an assignment operator, it means assigned. So yummy is assigned to
**cheese**. It\'s easy to use the word equals because we\'re used to
seeing the symbol in association with math, where we see 2 plus 2 equals
4 and we say equals but in programming, we want to say assigned. Yummy
is assigned to **cheese**.

Then the next example we have a variable called **age** and it\'s
assigned a value of 25. Twenty-five is a number. It doesn\'t need to go
inside quotes because JavaScript knows what a 25 is.

![](./images/media/image47.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

In JavaScript, variables are case-sensitive. They have to follow certain
rules. For example, a variable has to start with a letter, you can\'t
start with a number.

This variable over here that says **1cat** is not going to work because
it starts with a number. Also, you should not start variables with
something like a dollar sign. They\'re used a lot by libraries, so you
should not do that as well. The third example, **my-cat** is not going
to work because JavaScript sees the dash as a minus sign. It thinks your
just trying to subtract cat from my which is not going to work it all
either.

Also, you can\'t have a space in a variable name because **var** my
might be a variable, but then it doesn\'t know what to do with cat
because it sees that as a separate thing because there\'s a space in
there.

![](./images/media/image48.png){width="5.0in"
height="2.8135684601924758in"}

Finally, there are certain keywords in JavaScript that you can use as
names of variables like **new** is a keyword. Up here I have some of the
keywords pulled up on the W3Schools website. W3Schools is one of the
places you can go to get a lot of information about JavaScript, basic
information. We\'ll also look a lot at the MDN, the Mozilla Developer
Network, which is really the most authoritative place to get information
about JavaScript, but it can be a little bit overwhelming at first as
well. The W3Schools is a little bit easier to understand.

You can see here that there are a bunch of keywords. You\'ll notice that
some of them have an asterisk in here. Words marked with an asterisk are
new in **ECMAScript 5 and 6**. Remember, we talked about the versions of
JavaScript, so now when you see **ECMAScript 5 and 6,** you know that
we\'re talking about **ECMAScript 5** which was released in 2009, that
was the big release then, and **ECMAScript 6** or **ES6** was the
version that was released in 2015. These are all keywords that you can
use as names for variables in JavaScript.

![](./images/media/image49.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

Over on the right in this image here you\'ll see we have variable cat
with lowercase c, variable cat all in uppercase letters, and variable
Cat with a capital C. These are three different variables that hold
three different values. It\'s generally better practice to use lowercase
letters when creating variables or to do what\'s called camel casing
like we have done at the bottom here; myCat with a capital C in the
middle, so it\'s like a hump in the middle. We like camels in
JavaScript. That\'s called camel casing. That\'s not specific to
JavaScript but it\'s something that is in a lot of programming
languages. But we use that frequently in JavaScript. You\'ll frequently
see variables that are using camel casing.

# JavaScript Variables Practice -- Part 1 (7:12)

![](./images/media/image50.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

We\'ve been talking long enough about JavaScript. So now it\'s time to
actually get down and write some. And I hope you\'re ready to do that
because it\'s pretty exciting to start seeing you come alive on web
pages. And it\'ll be a little while before we start making really
interesting things, but we\'ll be working with the basics now. So let\'s
get started with that.

![](./images/media/image51.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.071581364829396in"}

And what we can do with our browser is we can actually open just a new
browser tab and use the console to write some JavaScript. Because
JavaScript is native to the browser, we can write it right into the
browser and it\'ll actually do stuff in the browser. I have a new tab
over here and you can create a new tab for yourself. And I\'m just going
to right click and choose **inspect**.

![](./images/media/image52.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.071581364829396in"}

And you have to right click on the white area, you can\'t right click on
an element.

![](./images/media/image53.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.071581364829396in"}

Right click on the white area and choose inspect. And that\'ll bring up
the inspector in Chrome. And again, I\'m in Chrome. And when I do that,
it might put the inspector over here it might do some different kinds of
things. Some different buttons might be selected. But what you can do is
you can use these buttons here. You can arrange this thing, make it
bigger or smaller. You can use these buttons to move this inspector
around. So this button here will allow me to choose where I want it to
display.

![](./images/media/image54.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.071581364829396in"}

Right now, it\'s on the right but I could put it on the left or I could
put it on the bottom. I want it on the bottom in this case.

![](./images/media/image55.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.0673075240594927in"}

Sometimes, it\'s helpful to tear it off entirely into a different
window, which is this icon, but I\'m going to leave it down here on the
bottom. And then I want to close this thing down here because that\'s
just giving me some information. And I\'m going to make this come up
here.

![](./images/media/image56.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.0673075240594927in"}

And right now and on the elements tab, and I can see the HTML that is
making up this page. And you can actually drag around on here and
you\'ll see different elements of the page will get highlighted.

![](./images/media/image57.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.071581364829396in"}

But what I really want to do to write some JavaScript is the console. So
click on the console. And click the garbage can to clear console screen.
And now I can do things like create a variable, var cheese = \"yummy\".
And again, yummy is assigned to cheese, the variable cheese here, put a
semi colon and press Enter.

![](./images/media/image58.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.071581364829396in"}

Now before I do this, another thing that\'s useful is if this is seeming
very small in your screen, you can use Ctrl on Windows or Cmd at Mac and
the plus key to make the text larger or the minus key to make it
smaller. Plus and minus or you can do command zero to put it back to the
default size. So, a lot of times when I\'m working with students, they
have trouble seeing the syntax and I recommend making the actual code
larger so that you can see it better. So I\'m going to make it larger
like that. So var cheese = \"yummy\". Great, undefined is sort of the
return value. This doesn\'t have a return value. I\'m just assigning a
variable here so don\'t worry factor that says undefined here. Now that
I\'ve defined this variable, if I type cheese, you\'ll see that I get
yummy. That comes back. That\'s the return value for that variable, for
that variable name.

![](./images/media/image59.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.071581364829396in"}

I\'m going to make a new variable. Line and assign it a value of 5. And
I get a 5 back. That returns the value of 5. So I could make another
variable. When I created my num, you\'ll notice I forgot to use the var
keyword. And that\'s fine. JavaScript will adjust for that in this case
and we\'ll talk later about what happens when you don\'t use the var
keyword. But in this case, it\'s fine. It actually created a variable
called **myNum** and assigned it 5.

![](./images/media/image60.png){width="3.5in"
height="2.150107174103237in"}
![](./images/media/image61.png){width="3.5in"
height="2.150107174103237in"}

But it would be better to use the var keyword for **myOtherNum** = 6,
that comes back undefined. And this came back with 5 because of the fact
that I didn\'t use the var keyword. But if I do **myNum**, you\'ll see
I\'ll still get 5. If I do **myOtherNum**, and you\'ll notice that in
Chrome, it\'s predicting what I\'m going to type. And if I press tab on
the keyboard, I don\'t even have to type that whole thing. I can do
something like, Var sum = myNum Plus myOtherNum, I can even pick it from
the list using my keyboard here. So I don\'t even have to type it. Now
if I do sum, you\'ll notice I get an 11 because it\'s doing basic
arithmetic.

![](./images/media/image62.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.071581364829396in"}

I can also use a method called **console.log**. **Console.log**, and I
could do **myNum, Times, MyOtherNum**. Semi colon, and you\'ll notice
that I get 30 because it\'s taken 5 and multiplied it by 6. Now we\'re
in the console, so we don\'t have to use the **console.log** statement
here. The **console.log** method, but because I can just do **myNum**
times **myOtherNum**. And you\'ll see I still get 30. But I\'m showing
you the **console.log** method because when we start working with files,
we\'ll use this method a lot to send things to this console. While I\'m
in the console, I don\'t actually need to use it.

# JavaScript Variables Practice -- Part 2

![](./images/media/image63.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

Here you can see a cleared out the console by clicking this clear thing
here.

That won\'t actually forget any of the code that you\'ve put.

![](./images/media/image64.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.053418635170604in"}

If you do want to actually forget the variables, you can click the
Refresh button up here that will actually forget everything.

![](./images/media/image65.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.053418635170604in"}

Now I\'m getting the error that came back just with the Google page, but
I can clear that here. I can actually create variables fresh that way.
But let\'s do this, I\'m going to make a variable **var notNum**, I\'m
going to assign it a value of five. But I\'m putting it in quotes
because it\'s not really a number. It\'s a string with a number in it. I
can make another **var newNum**, I\'m going to assign it a value of ten.
That\'s actually a number. Now watch this. If I do **newNum** plus
**notNum**, it gives me 105 inside quotes.

Now, JavaScript is loosely typed. You do not have to specify what type
of data a variable\'s going to hold when you create the variable. A lot
of people don\'t like that about JavaScript. Way back in the day when
they were working on ECMAScript 4, you\'ll remember that version was
never released. They were thinking seriously about switching JavaScript
to being a more strongly typed language. Like other languages, where you
have to declare what type of data a particular variable will hold when
you create the variable. But in JavaScript, you don\'t have to do that.

Douglas Crockford, who we mentioned earlier, made a strong argument that
the loosely-typed nature of JavaScript is actually very expressive and
very powerful in its own way if you know how to use it properly. But it
can lead to confusion. Here\'s a good example of that, where we might
get something that we don\'t expect. Perhaps we expected to add 10 to 5
and get 15, but instead, we got 105 in a string. So that\'s an important
distinction and something important to understand about the way
JavaScript works.

![](./images/media/image66.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.053418635170604in"}

Another thing to know is that the plus operator in JavaScript does
double duty. It will add numbers together, so we can make another
variable, var newNum 2, and assign it a value of six. Then I could do
newNum plus newnum2 and it\'ll give me 16. So it\'ll add numbers
together, but it will also **concatenate** strings. Here we were seeing
the plus sign actually doing some **concatenating** because one of those
elements was a string. So it can **concatenate** it together and I got
105. Then here, when we use the plus sign, it\'s actually adding. This
is a problem in JavaScript and they\'ve done some things in the language
to help mitigate the fact that the plus sign does both things. We\'ll
look at what we can do to deal with that. We\'ll look at some better
ways of putting strings together other than using the plus sign. But
these features of JavaScript that were built in from the beginning,
persists to this day.

The plus signs still does two things, it **concatenates** and it adds.
Here we\'re seeing already, very much at the beginning of the course,
things about JavaScript that are a little bit different. We\'re seeing
that it is a loosely typed language and that\'s unusual. We\'re also
seeing that the plus sign does double duty. That\'s not only unusual but
a little bit problematic. Already you\'re learning a little bit about
why we use JavaScript in certain ways or why we type in certain ways.
We\'ll get into more detail about that as we go along.

# JavaScript Variables Practice -- Part 3 (5:21)

![](./images/media/image67.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

I\'m going to clear out my console here, press the clear button there,
and then I\'m going to create a new variable, var myNum equals 10,
We\'ll put that in there.

![](./images/media/image68.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.053418635170604in"}

Then I\'m going to make another variable, var, myNumAsString. I\'m going
to make a variable there and we\'ll call it five. But that variable
again is a string. Now it\'s important to note that even though
JavaScript is loosely typed, it doesn\'t mean that variables don\'t have
a type. If I do typed, which is a method that allows me to pass in a
variable like myNum. It\'ll tell me that it is in fact a number. Whereas
if I do typeof myNumAsString, I can actually pick it from the list here
so I don\'t have to type the whole thing. It\'ll tell me that\'s a
string. If I make a variable, var undefinedvariable, and leave it empty,
so there\'s nothing in here. I could do typeof undefinedvariable to get
my variable here. You\'ll see that I get undefined. Or I could do var
nothingAtAll and assign it null, and I could do typeof nothingAtAll, and
I get object, so that\'s kind of interesting. These are all very
different variables with different values. That\'s an important thing to
understand about JavaScript, but they do have type associated with them.

![](./images/media/image69.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.053418635170604in"}

Let\'s try one more. I\'m going to make another variable var
emptyString. I\'m going to assign it a couple of quotes, and if I do
typeof emptyString, you\'ll see even though there\'s nothing in there,
there\'s nothing really assigned to this variable. The fact that I put a
pair of quotes there means that it is in fact a string. It\'s also kind
of important to note that I could use single quotes or double quotes in
JavaScript.

![](./images/media/image70.png){width="3.5in"
height="2.1373928258967627in"}![](./images/media/image71.png){width="3.5in"
height="2.1373928258967627in"}

Now if you want to find out more about the type of method, you could
come over here and just Google JavaScript typeof. The MDN will come up
very quickly, if not the first, sometimes you\'ll get W3Schools. The
MDN, which is the Mozilla Developer Network, is the definitive resource
for web technologies such as HTML and CSS and will give you a lot of
information about different methods and different things you can use.

![](./images/media/image72.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.053418635170604in"}

We\'ll be referring a lot to the MDN throughout this course, sometimes
the W3Schools website as well, but the MDN really is sort of the
definitive resource, but it can be a little bit confusing at first.
Sometimes the W3Schools website is a little bit easier to understand,
but the MDN is very thorough. That gives us a very basic start at
creating some variables that can hold different pieces of data. At this
point, you\'re probably wondering yeah, so what? But remember that as
we\'re learning a language, right now we\'re just learning the alphabet
and the letters by themselves don\'t really do all that much. It\'s not
until you start putting them together to form words they can start to
have meaning.

We\'ll be working on some more of these very basic elements of
JavaScript, but then pretty quickly we\'re going to be getting into more
interesting aspects of the language, and you\'ll be creating more
interesting little programs that will actually do things on web pages
and on websites.

# JavaScript Arrays -- Part 1 (5:27)

![](./images/media/image73.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

JavaScript arrays.

![](./images/media/image74.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4427351268591426in"}

An array is really just a container with sub-containers and it\'s the
next piece of the puzzle that we need to talk about in terms of
JavaScript. We talked about variables, and an array is just another type
of variable. But instead of holding one piece of data, it can hold
multiple pieces of data. Think of it like a pillbox. Perhaps you or a
friend or relative has to take medications each day and perhaps they
have a box that looks like the image here on your screen where you have
different containers that are going to hold different pills for the
week. Frequently in JavaScript, we have to deal with groups of things.

![](./images/media/image75.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4427351268591426in"}

If we go back to our robot analogy, if we\'re teaching our robot how to
wash the dishes, perhaps glasses need to be handled in a certain way or
perhaps plates need to be handled in a certain way. Then when it comes
to working with the silverware, the silverware needs to be handled in a
certain way, but then we\'ve got a subgroup of spoons, and knives, and
forks, and maybe other pieces of silverware. That\'s a group within a
group. The analogy that works best for that is thinking about groups of
things with arrays.

![](./images/media/image76.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4427351268591426in"}

Let\'s take a look at what that looks like. In JavaScript, we can create
a new array in a couple of different ways. We can use the new keyword
with array and parentheses as shown here or we can create it more
explicitly using the square brackets as shown below on the right here.
Let\'s actually do this over the console. I think it\'s helpful to
actually see us create these elements.

![](./images/media/image77.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.053418635170604in"}

I\'m going to come over here and make a new tab, and choose Inspect,
right-click and choose Inspect. Then I\'m going to run the console here,
clear out this area. Then I\'m going to make an array, var. I\'m going
to call it colors one equals new array. Then in here, in quotes, I\'m
going to put some colors, \"red,\" \"green,\" \"blue.\" Now I\'ve
created that array. I can access those colors by typing
**colors1\[0\].** That will get me the first color in that array.
That\'ll give me the red or I could make an array more explicitly. This
is the more common way that you\'ll see it done is var colors 2 equals
square bracket and then \"yellow,\" \"orange,\" \"purple,\" square
bracket, semicolon. Now I\'ve created a second array and I could do
colors 2 square bracket 2. That will get me the third element in the
array.

Now, square bracket two gets me the third element. Arrays are
zero-indexed. The length of the array is 3, **colors2.length**. Because
there are three elements in the array. It\'s just they\'re numbered 0,
1, and 2. Normally, we start counting with 1 first, 1, 2, 3. But in
programming, frequently we start counting with 0 first, 0, 1, 2, but the
length of the array is 3. That\'s an important distinction and something
to be aware of.

# JavaScript Arrays -- Part 2 (3:17)

![](./images/media/image78.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

Unlike a pill box, which really can\'t hold much more than just pills,
you can put anything into an array in JavaScript.

![](./images/media/image79.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.053419728783902in"}

You can even put in an array in array. So you think about a pillbox with
a sub container with even smaller divisions in it. So let\'s take a look
at what that looks like.

![](./images/media/image80.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.053418635170604in"}

Let me switch back over to my tab here. And I\'m going to clear out this
tab by clicking the clear button there. And I\'m just going to paste
this in but you might want to type it, it\'s a little bit hard to type
and get right but it\'s worth trying if you can, but I\'m going to paste
this vehicles array in here. And now if I do, if I want to access an
element from this array I could do vehicles \[1\]. That\'s going to go
and get the line that starts with which element, there we go. And then
so it\'s going to give me this because this is zero, and then this is
one, right? So that\'s going to get me that into that sub array. You can
see it sort of showing up down there. And then if I do \[2\], that\'s
going to get me the Explorer element in that sub array. So you can do
things like that with arrays. That\'s kind of complicated. And you\'re
not probably going to be doing arrays inside of arrays to start off
with. But it\'s an important thing to understand about arrays is
they\'re very flexible tools for you can use to hold groups of data, and
that\'s very useful.

![](./images/media/image81.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.053418635170604in"}

Another thing that\'s interesting is that a regular variable holding a
string can be treated like an array in JavaScript. So if I make a
variable, var joke = \"The chicken crossed the road\". Now I\'ve got a
variable called joke, but I can actually treat it like an array. I can
do joke \[4\], and that\'s going to get me the c in chicken because
zero, one, two, three, four is going to give me that c in chicken. Or I
could do joke.length and it\'ll tell me that there are 28 characters in
that string. So that\'s kind of an interesting thing to understand about
arrays as well.

# JavaScript Arrays Practice (6:16)

![](./images/media/image82.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

Let\'s do a little bit of practice with arrays, so I can make a new
variable bar Animals and assign an array.

![](./images/media/image83.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.053418635170604in"}

Cat, dog, chicken and all of those animals will be in the array. So if I
just do animals. You\'ll see that I get back an array with three
elements, cat, dog and chicken. Now, arrays come with certain array
methods that you can do to arrays specifically, so if I do animals.

![](./images/media/image84.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.053418635170604in"}

That push llama, now there are four elements in the animals array The
cat, the dog, the chicken and the llama are all in the array.

![](./images/media/image85.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.053418635170604in"}

Remember, we can use the console log method we don\'t really need to
hear in the console, but we will when we go to using file shortly. So
it\'s worth remembering that we can do console dot log. Parentheses,
that\'s a parentheses, animals. Square bracket, one or two. Let\'s do
two since I put a two in their square bracket, and then the parentheses,
console log animals square bracket two. And then if I press return
there, it\'ll give me the chicken. I don\'t really need to use the
console log method here in the console. But you can, and it\'s worth
remembering that you can do that.

![](./images/media/image86.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.053418635170604in"}

Now, what if I wanted to remove an element from the array or we could do
animals that splice (1, 1) and that will take the dog out of the array.
So now, if I do animals, you can see it\'s got the cat, chicken, and the
lama,but not the dog.

![](./images/media/image87.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.053418635170604in"}

And I could do push and push the dog back into the array. Let\'s do
that, animals don\'t push, dog and now the dog is back in the array.
Another array method is sort, animals. dot sort. And notice now that the
order of the animals in the array has changed slightly, so that the dog
is in the third position based on alphabetical order. So there are a lot
of array methods that you can use.

![](./images/media/image88.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.053418635170604in"}

And a really good place to go look at them would be the
**W3schools.com** website or the MDN JavaScript arrays. And here it is
here and then they\'ll have array methods here. There are all kinds of
examples of array methods that you can use. You can join, we can do all
kinds of things. And it\'s worth exploring some of the different methods
and trying them out on your own with just messing around with arrays.
And just working in the console and getting used to how this works,
because that\'s a really great way of learning sort of the basics of
JavaScript.

![](./images/media/image89.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.053418635170604in"}

Here\'s a challenge for you, we have an array for animals here, and we
can see that the length of the array is four but you could also find out
by doing animals dot length and you\'ll get four. Now, what if you
didn\'t know how long the array was? How could you always get the last
element in the array? What would be the code that I could type in here
that would always give me the final element in the array no matter how
long it is. **animals\[animals.length-1\];** Here\'s what I would do. I
would do animals, then square bracket, then I want to get the length,
animals dot length but I need to subtract one because the length of the
array is four. Actually the last element is element number three and
you\'ll see that that will in fact get me the Llama at the very end.

So I\'m going into my animals array and what I\'m passing in is
**animals\[animals.length-1\];** animals dot length, which will be a 4-
1 which gets me this element here. Zero, one, two three and that may
seem a little counterintuitive to begin with, but you\'ll get used to
working with arrays and with the lengths of arrays and with different
ways of getting elements out of arrays.

# Additional Resources {#additional-resources-1 .unnumbered}

Here are resources related to these lessons:

https://www.coursera.org/learn/javascript-basics/supplement/vzVsq/additional-resources

-   [Reserved Words](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_reserved.asp)

> https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_reserved.asp

-   [Array
    Methods](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array)

> https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array

# Week Two:  {#week-two .unnumbered}

# 2.01 Module 2 Introduction (0:51) {#module-2-introduction-051 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image90.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

Welcome to the second module. In this module, we\'ll get further into
the basics of the JavaScript language. There are certain things that
you\'ll find in many modern programming languages, such as control
structures, such as being able to figure out if something is true or how
to handle something in a loop and these kinds of things. We\'ll be doing
that sort of work in this second module. There\'s a lot of practice and
there\'s a lot of opportunities along the way to get used to the
JavaScript syntax. I encourage you to do as much of that as you possibly
can.

# 2.02 Visual Studio -- Part 1 (4:39) {#visual-studio-part-1-439 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image91.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

In this lesson, we\'re going to be talking about working with the code
editor and I\'m going to be specifically looking at Visual Studio Code,
which I have pictured here on this slide. But I also have it open over
here in this tab and you can go down the download Visual Studio Code for
Mac or Windows for free and it\'s a great code editor if you prefer to
use a different code editor such as Atom or Sublime Text or something
else. That\'s fine too. As long as it\'s got great features for editing
code and it\'s not a word processor like Microsoft Word. But I\'ll be
using Visual Studio Code throughout this course, so it might be helpful
for you to use that as well.

![](./images/media/image92.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.0673075240594927in"}

Sometimes when you open Visual Studio Code, you\'ll get these tabs open
with the Welcome or with new release notes if they\'ve come out with a
new version and you can just close those tabs by clicking on the \"X\".
You\'ll notice I have Visual Studio Code open in running here, but I
don\'t have any of those editors open and I can make a new file by just
going and choosing a new file, and that creates a new file here.

It\'s important with Visual Studio Code that before you do anything
else, you save your file. That way it knows what type of file you\'re
working with. I\'m going to choose file save as, and I\'m going to just
save this as \"**myfile.hml**\". I\'m going to save an HTML file, to
begin with on my desktop. Once I have an HTML file, then I can get the
basic HTML structure by holding down \"**Shift**\", pressing an
**exclamation point**, and then pressing \"**Tab**\" and that will give
me the basic structure for my page.

If you take an HTML class, you\'ll learn to type the **doctype** and to
type all these tags, we can use the shortcut. Again, what you did to get
it, I\'ll just delete this exclamation point and then press \"Tab\" and
then you can come in here and give your document a name, \"My File\".
The title shows up in the tab in the browser. That\'s important. Great.
I can save that.

Now, one thing to notice really quickly while we\'re here, see this dot
up here., that means this file has changed and it has not yet been
saved. One of the frequent mistakes I see at the beginning with users
getting started with, working with HTML and CSS and JavaScript is
they\'ll add things to the file and then they\'ll forget to save them,
and then they\'re going to run the file and they realize their changes
aren\'t showing up, so watch out for that little dot. You can get that
to go away by doing \"File\", \"Save\" over here or \"Command S\",
\"Control S\" in windows, and then it\'ll go back to just the X, which
you would use to close that tab and close that window app, and then I
can open this back up again by dropping it here and that will open that
file back up again. That gets me some basics of getting files opened and
working here in Visual Studio Code.

A really important note, if you\'re on Windows is, open up just any
Explorer Window. Click on the \"View\" tab and then go over and check
the box that says \"File name extensions\". That way when you save your
files, you\'ll see the \".html\" File extension, and that\'s really
important, but too many times I have students making files that say
\"myfile.html.html\", and that\'s largely because Windows hides those
file extensions by default. But we really want to be able to see them.
It\'s really important to be able to see them and I\'d show you this on
my Windows laptop, but my Windows laptop has a terrible sound-card and
recording audio on it, just doesn\'t work out very well. But here I have
a screenshot of it so please make sure you do that. Also. Make sure that
when you save files, make sure that the filename is always lowercase and
never has a space in it so I have \"myfile\" all as one word here. Do
not put spaces in filenames, they cannot be more explicit about that.

# 2.03 Visual Studio -- Part 2 (5:48) {#visual-studio-part-2-548 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image93.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

I\'m back in my code editor. And now, I\'m ready to add a script. So
let\'s add a script to this file. And we can see some JavaScript
actually happened here.

First, I\'m going to put some HTML on the page, My First Script, nice,
if I spell that right. And then you can actually put scripts really
anywhere inside this file. Sometimes they go in the head of the page
here inside the head tag. Frequently, you\'ll see them down here just
before the closing body tag. So I\'m going to make a script tag, make
sure you spell right, script. Look at that, what a mess, I\'m going to
make a script tag. So I have a script tag, and I\'m going to click
between these two angle brackets here and move that down. Maybe I should
do that again, just to make sure I get it right here, that\'s confusing,
script, like so there we go. And then it puts the cursor between the
two, and I can move that down.

And here I can make a variable, var hello = Good Morning Bill. And then
in order to get it to do something currently what we have to work with
is the console. because that\'s what I\'ve shown you so far in the other
videos, we\'ll get to other things later. And really pretty soon, but
for right now we just have the console. So I can use console.log,
remember, we talked about this method before. (hello) to put that
variable or really the string associated with that variable into the
console. So I can save this file and there\'s the data up here, I have
to save it. I can save the file and then I can go over to Chrome over
here. And I can go to File and open, or on Windows, you can do Cmd+O.
And then here I am on my desktop and I can open this file. And it comes
up and it doesn\'t really look like much, it\'s just a webpage and
we\'re not even seeing the script run.

But if we go and choose Inspect and then click on the Console, you\'ll
see that it comes up here. And my JavaScript is actually running and
it\'s doing this. So hat\'s actually working great and, Really cool,
we\'ve gotten our first script to run. The next thing to talk about is
how we can make some comments in JavaScript in case we want to remind
ourselves exactly what we\'re doing. It\'s always good practice to add
comments to your scripts so that when you come back to them later, you
know what\'s going on. And there are two ways of making comments in
JavaScript. I can use the slash twice, two slashes, and I can type the
variable is below, something like that, or the variable below, I don\'t
know we could say something else about it. But putting two slashes, two
forward slashes here, will keep JavaScript from trying to do anything
with this line here. If you want to have a longer comment, you can use
the slash and a star and then end comment with a star and a slash. And
then in here, I can put a longer comment about anything that I want and
it can go multiple lines. So I can have that started with a slash star
and with the star slash. And that will help me make comments in my code
so that later when I come back to try to find out what I was doing, I
can leave notes for my future self, which is super helpful.

While we\'re here, another thing that\'s important is I can actually
make the code in the browser larger or smaller by pressing the Cmd plus
or Ctrl plus in Windows on my keyboard here, let\'s click on that. And
that will make the code larger or smaller. And I can make this window
over here smaller too if the code is getting squished in there, you can
close it all together. This thing opens and closes that Explorer. But I
can make the code larger or smaller. And depending on how good your eyes
are, you might want the code to be larger or smaller, Cmd+0 will put it
at its default size, but command minus will make it smaller. So make
sure you\'re setting your code to a size that\'s comfortable for you to
read. Because a lot of times when I\'m working with students, I noticed
that they\'re having a hard time seeing the difference between the semi
colon In a colon, those are two different characters. And if you\'re
having a hard time seeing the difference between the characters in the
code is probably too small for you, so make sure you set it at a
comfortable size.

# 2.04 Visual Studio -- Part 3 (9:48) {#visual-studio-part-3-948 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image94.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

The next thing to talk about is folders and working with folders for
projects. This file, myfile.html, this file here is just sitting on my
desktop. That\'s fine for a single file, but usually, if I\'m working on
a project, I\'m going to have a folder with a bunch of related files. I
might have an HTML file. I might have a CSS file, I might have multiple
JavaScript files as we get going here. But for right now this is just a
single file. That\'s not really very useful by itself.

Over here I\'m going to make a folder, and I\'m going to give the folder
a name, myproject. Notice there are no spaces in that folder name. Never
put a space. Also all the letters or lowercase, it\'ll just make your
life so much easier if you keep everything lowercase. It doesn\'t have
to be, but you have to not have spaces, so myproject. Then over here,
close this file, and open up the sidebar here, and no folder opened. I
can actually open that folder, myproject. Now you can see I\'ve got my
welcome screen again and I\'ve got MYPROJECT here. There\'s no files in
this folder currently. I just made a folder and it\'s empty, but I can
put a file in that folder and close that welcome screen. Over here this
button will create a file. This button will create a folder. Be sure
you\'re not confused between the two.

If I make a new file, suppose I make a file and call it index.html.
That\'s going to be an HTML file. I can put that in my folder. Now
you\'ll notice it\'s created the index file. Not only that, but if I
look in myproject folder over here, you can see that index.html has been
created in that folder. I can manage my whole project from here. Perhaps
I have another file in here. I\'m going to have styles.css. Maybe
that\'s going to have some styles for my webpage, and it\'s going to go
into that file. Now that file is now in the folder over here. In this
way, I can control and keep track of all the files for myproject and
they\'re all in one place. Remember I said earlier, you have to get
really good at file management and you have to make sure that all the
files for a project stay in the folder. You might have other folders in
the folder.

If I come back here, I might make a folder for images. Now this is a
folder, and currently there\'s nothing in the folder, but if I look in
this folder over here, you can see that the folder images is here, and I
can put images in there. Be careful when you\'re creating files, not to
accidentally put the file inside the folder if you don\'t mean to. If I
click \"New File\" here, it\'s going to create this file inside of
Images, oops.html. This file is actually inside the Images folder here,
and I can see it over here as well, as being inside the Images folder.
If I decide I don\'t want that file, I can right-click here and choose
\"Delete\". It will ask me, do I really want to move it to the trash?
and sure enough, from over here, that file is now not inside that folder
and folder is empty again.

By working with this Explorer over here, we can create files and manage
files for our projects and make sure that the files are in the correct
places at all times. The last new thing that I have for this lesson is I
just want to show you that Visual Studio Code is very customizable. You
can add all extensions to it. If I click on this Gear icon down here, I
can get into the Settings. I can do all things in here with extensions
and other things. For example, you can search for Settings or
Extensions. Here are Extensions here. \[inaudible\] Settings. You can do
all fun things to make Visual Studio Code more personalized. Maybe you
like this black look for your code editor, or perhaps you prefer a
lighter theme. I installed this Extension here called Atom One Light
Theme. You can click on that, and currently it\'s disabled, but I can
enable this theme. I think down here should be able to choose future
contributions, it should be switching here. Not sure why they didn\'t
switch. This happens sometimes. Select Color Theme. There we go. Here
I\'ve got the Color Themes and I can select that, \[inaudible\].
Sometimes you have to mess around with this Extensions in the Theme
Editor, in the Settings to really figure it out. There\'s all themes
that you can get for Visual Studio Code to customize it and make it look
the way you want it to look. I go back to my files and here I am. Now
you\'ll notice that my files will look a little bit different because
I\'m using the Atom one light theme. Just to remember here, we\'ve done
quite a lot to make this page. I don\'t know why it\'s not immediate my
file. To make this page different here. I\'m going to redo that last
part because I mess that up a bit. You can see here I am in myproject
again for my Index file. I come over here and click. Just to review what
we did in this lesson, I can type an exclamation point press tab to get
the basic structure of a page. I can add a title for my document here
that will show up and my page. I can add some HTML. I\'m just going to
add an h1. Here is a heading. Then I can add some script tags, and I can
add a script to my page. I could do something like var myVariable and
set it to \"hello\". Then I could cancel logout console.log myVariable.
Notice it pops up here. I can even just press, don\'t even have to type
the whole thing. I can just press return to get it to pop that in place
so I make sure I don\'t spell it wrong. Then a semicolon. Semicolons are
used in JavaScript at the ends of statements. I can save that file, and
then I can come back to the browser and test it. Let\'s do that real
quick. Comeback here to Chrome. This is the other file. I\'m going to
open this file. I could do Command All, there we go myproject index, and
there it is. It\'s doing Hello there. The Hello came up in the Console
lock there. That\'s a review of everything we learned in this lesson.
You now able to work with files and get those files to output content
into the console that you can then test in your browser. That\'s a great
way of working. Another way of opening your file is to right-click on
the file and choose \"Open With\" and I want to open with the browser,
you could even try a different browser. Brave is a great browser to try.
Brave is using the same rendering engine as Chrome. It actually works
the same way as Chrome generally. What\'s interesting about Brave is
that the CEO of Brave is actually that Brendan Eich guy who invented
JavaScript. It\'s interesting to note that the guy invented Java Script
is now in the business of creating a browser. That\'s interesting.
Great. This will get you started and I look forward to seeing you in the
next lesson where we can start writing some interesting scripts.

# 2.05 Operators, Booleans & Selection in JavaScript (8:11) {#operators-booleans-selection-in-javascript-811 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image95.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

Operators Booleans and selection in JavaScript.

![](./images/media/image96.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.265384951881015in"}

Operators in JavaScript are the symbols that will allow us to create
different expressions in JavaScript. And here are just a few of them.
We\'ve already seen the plus sign and the equal sign, which remember,
equals is an assignment operator. There\'s also minus and the Asterix is
used to multiply and forward slashes used to divide and the percent is a
modules operator.

![](./images/media/image97.png){width="3.5in"
height="1.9822123797025373in"}![](./images/media/image98.png){width="3.5in"
height="1.982211286089239in"}

If you want to find out more about operators you can come over to the
W3schools.com website and look at the different operators though. Get
all listed here comparison operators, logical operators, all kinds of
stuff here. So you can come through and find all the details about all
of the different operators if you want to there. But we\'re just going
to start with a few of them so it\'s not too overwhelming and most of
the operators are very similar to what you would find in other C-based
programming languages. C, C++, C sharp, Objective C, and so forth. Okay,
so there\'s also Booleans in JavaScript.

![](./images/media/image99.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.265384951881015in"}

And it\'s very nice to know that a Boolean can have two values true or
false. And that\'s it. So here I\'m making a variable called happy. And
I\'ve set I\'ve assigned it the value of true. Notice that true is not
inside quotes. JavaScript knows what true means true is a key word that
means that something is true. And false is a key word that means that
something is false. So I have a variable here sad, that\'s false. I can
use an if statement to check to see if something is true. So if happy,
now happy has assigned true to it, so it\'s going to do something here.
If I were to replace happy with sad. Then the else would fire it instead
of they have and we would do something down here if happy was false. Or
if I change the value here from true to false, then happy would be
false. And it would do this down here. So that gets us started with a
little bit of that.

So next we\'re going to move to our code editor and make a file and try
working with some selections and Booleans and that kind of fun stuff.
Here I am in my code editor, and I\'m going to make a new file. And I\'m
going to make a file and before I do anything, I\'m going to save the
file. Save an image, just save it on the desktop, and I\'m going to call
it selections.html. Notice all lowercase no spaces in the dot html
extension. I\'m going to save that on the desktop and then again.
Exclamation point will allow me to press tab, which gives me kind of my
basic structure for an HTML page. And then I\'m going to type in here.
Testing selections And there we go. And then in here I\'m just going to
add an h1 testing selections. That\'s nice and then I\'m going to add a
script tag. So we\'ll go ahead and add a script in here. And then what
are we going to put in the script? Well, let\'s make some bullets I\'m
going to have Var red and I\'m going to set that to value true. Then we
have var blue and I\'m going to set that to value of false. There we go.
So I\'ve got two values here. One is set to true and the other one is
set to false. Now if I were to make an if statement if parentheses, and
I were to check the value of those red. I\'m going to check the value of
red. If red is true, which is it is, then something\'s going to happen
here. Something happens. Red is going to evaluate to true because I have
true assigned to the red variable here. If I were to put blue in here,
then this would not be true, in which case something else would happen.
So I\'m going to come down here and add else.Now this else statement,
sometimes you\'ll see it up on the same line. Like the This and
sometimes you\'ll see it on the next line like that, that doesn\'t
really matter. That\'s a styling choice. Some people like to keep their
code a little bit more compact and put it like this. Some people find
it\'s a little bit easier to read if it\'s like that. So that\'s up to
you and then something else would happen here. Console.log, the
statement is false. And up here we\'ll do console log \[SOUND\] The
statement is true.Very exciting. Now we can try this out and come over
here to our browser. I\'m going to make a new tab here and open this
file selections. Open, and I\'ve got my testing selections. If I right
click and choose inspect, I can go to the console and sure enough, the
statement is true. Now I can come back to my code editor, and if I
change this to blue Blue is false. So this statement will run. So if I
come back and then click refresh, now the statement is false. Or
alternatively, I could to change the value here to false, change that
back to red. Save that and then come back and you\'ll see that in fact
It\'s still coming up false. One thing to note is I\'ve added some extra
spaces in here, usually you won\'t see programmers doing that. Usually
you\'ll see more like this, I just add the extra space in there Just to
make it a little bit easier to read and a little bit easier to evaluate,
but this faces aren\'t necessary there. Often times you\'ll see a space
here and that\'s fine too. But it\'s not necessary either down here. I
think this one put a space in whether I wanted it or not. And that\'s
fine, so. So red is either blue false or true. And blue is either false
or true because I\'ve used these Boolean \'s here. True. The syntax
highlighting should help you if you spell true wrong like I just did. It
should tell you what something\'s wrong there because of the colors.
Right. And now the statement is true.

# 2.06 Try This! (3:10) {#try-this-310 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image100.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

This is interesting. Let\'s try this. I\'m going to make a variable
called green and then see what happens if I pass green in here. Notice
green doesn\'t have a value here. So let\'s take a look at that. I\'m
going to make a variable green, and just put a semicolon. And then down
here, I\'m going to test green. Is green true or false? What do you
think? This can happen here. Let\'s test that. The statement is false.
This is an important thing to understand about JavaScript. Green is
essentially undefined. It\'s an undefined variable. Undefined resolves
this false JavaScript. JavaScript has a concept of truthy and falsy
which is kind of fascinating. So things are either true ish or false
ish. And they could be explicitly true or false like red and blue out
here, but they could false ish. And JavaScript treats variables that are
undefined as false. Also oops, green equals null, that would be false.
So that comes up false. Green equals 0, 0 is false. But if I put any
other number in there, any other real number like a 1. 1 is true. What
about 100? That\'ll be true too. What about minus 100? That\'s true as
well. So, numbers are true except for zero, zero is falsy. It\'s false
ish. So, zero comes up as false, which is kind of an interesting thing.
So things that we know are false or undefined is false, null is false,
zero is false. False is false. Other things are true. But if I put
Cheese Cheese is true. So that\'s a very interesting thing about
JavaScript.

# 2.07 Comparing Values (8:16) {#comparing-values-816 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image101.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

Let\'s look at comparing values. This is something we\'ll do a lot in
JavaScript. We often want to find out if the value here is the same as
the value somewhere else. I\'m going to go back and leave green here is
undefined, like so. Then I\'m going to make a new variable, var myNum
and assign it the value five and var otherNum and assign it value of
five. Then down here I can check to see if myNum is the same as equals
otherNum. It\'s really important to read this as the same as. This is
assigns, five is assigned to otherNum and five is assigned to myNum. But
here what I\'m checking to see is myNum the same as the otherNum. In
this case it is. So if I save this and test this, you\'ll see the
statement is true because myNum is the same as the otherNum. If I change
this to a different number, then I\'m obviously going to get false.
That\'s not true. So the statement is false, they\'re not the same as.
Instead of equals equals, I could use exclamation point equals. That
will be not the same answer. Is that true? Is myNum not the same as
otherNum? Yes, that\'s true. Statement is true, so we can do this kind
of thing as well. We can also check for greater than or less than so we
could say, is myNum less than. Is it less than my otherNum? That should
be true because myNum is less than the otherNum, let\'s see, and that
statement is true. I could try is it greater than. Is myNum greater than
the otherNum. Is that true? That\'s not going to be true because five is
not greater than six. But we can test for these different kinds of
scenarios, myNum and otherNum. We can use less than and greater than and
check to see if that\'s true. Let\'s try this out. This is interesting,
var notNum equals to five. So this five is a string with the number five
in it. Now can I check to see if myNum is the same as notNum? Do you
think I\'m going to get there if I save that and try that? The statement
is true. Well, that\'s interesting. How can a five be the same as five
inside quotes? Remember, JavaScript is loosely typed and it allows for
something called type coercion. What\'s going on here is that JavaScript
is saying, well, we\'ve got a five here and we\'ve got a five in a
string and they\'re basically the same, so I\'m going to call that true.
So that\'s truthy. It\'s truish. You can think of it that way, which is
very interesting. Now, again, this is the kind of thing that can drive
programmers crazy because you could end up making a mistake in your
programming or having something unexpected happening. You don\'t want
unexpected things to happen in your programs, that\'s never a good
thing. I believe it was ES5 in 2009, they introduced the triple equals
operator, which is exactly the same as and that won\'t do type coercion.
Remember, this is the kind of thing that we\'re working with in
JavaScript. They don\'t want to just get rid of the double-equals or
change what it does because that would break other programs. That will
break programs that have been happening in the past. But they can add
another operator which is the triple equals and that one will not do
type coercion. So you\'ll notice this one will come up false. That
statement is false because it won\'t do the type coercion. There is also
the same thing with the exclamation point so you can say that\'s not
exactly the same as. You can read this as is myNum exactly the same as
notNum and the answer is no. Generally, it\'s considered better
programming to use the triple equals sign everywhere. Often in our
shorter scripts, it doesn\'t really matter and you\'ll see me equals
equals over time. But really if you want to get into really good habits,
always use the triple equals sign so that you don\'t ever have any type
coercion unless you really want it for some reason. Again, this is an
odd thing about JavaScript that you can do this. But it makes the
language very expressive and that\'s interesting, expressive in the
sense that these things are the same, a number 5, it\'s the same as the
five in quotes, that\'s interesting. One more thing I want to check out
here really quickly while we\'re here, I\'m going to change this five to
something like chicken and then I\'m going to make a new variable, var
myvalue equals notNum minus myNum. I\'m going to take chicken and
subtract five. That doesn\'t make any sense. What happens if I put my
value in here? You probably won\'t be surprised to see that that comes
up false. That\'s false. More than that, if I come down here and just
console.log my value, just to see what\'s actually in that my value when
I try to take a chicken and subtract five from it, what do I get over
here? Num not a number. Num is another thing in JavaScript that is
falsy. So in our list of things that are false are zero, false,
undefined, null and not a number. Those things all come up false in
JavaScript and that\'s an important thing to keep in mind as we move
forward with working with JavaScript and working with Booleans, and when
we\'re testing values.

# 2.08 Else If (5:56) {#else-if-556 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image102.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

JavaScript has an Else If. So we can run through a series of selection
checkers to see which one is true. So let\'s type this out. It\'s always
a good idea. So practice this stuff as much as you can and get use to
the syntax. Again, there are two months to get over with JavaScript and
the first one is done just by practicing. By just writing the stuff and
making mistakes and forgetting to put in the semicolon and the curly
braces or the square brackets and seeing what happens when you get in
here. So let\'s go ahead and type this in over here. So I\'m going to
come back here and I\'m going to add, maybe I want to comment this out
in Visual Studio code I can do option or in Windows Alt Shift A. And
that will come in that\'ll put a comment around something that I\'ve
selected. So down here I\'m going to make a variable for colors equals
square bracket, quote, red. Green Blue Yellow I\'m going to make a
variable var selected color Equals colors, square bracket and we\'ll do
three. Red is zero, one, two, three. Now, over here, so I\'ve got that,
and that\'s great. Now I can do an if else statement. So I could do if,
selected color is the same as equals red or yeah, let\'s do red. Red in
quotes, red. If it\'s the same as red, then I can console log something
out console dot log. The color is red. Now I can do an else if. And
again I can put else if on this line here like so. I think it\'s a
little bit easier to read if you move it down like this else if selected
colour in here I\'m going to cheat by copying and pasting. Else if
selected colour is blue. And again, I\'m just adding these extra spaces
because I think it\'s a little bit easier to read. But it\'s not really
common practice but that\'s okay. If the selected colour is blue, then
I\'m going to console log out. Blue actually should do green, green
snacks, it doesn\'t matter. I can go whichever order I want. In this
I\'m just going to go to read because that sort of makes sense and then
I can copy and paste the else if. Select the colour is change this one
to blue, and if it\'s not red, green or blue, then it must be yellow.
Okay, great. So with this script in place, we can test this. We come
over here and refresh this and you can see the color is yellow it went
through that list of items and chose the correct color. Whereas, if I
come up here and change this to a one to zero one and this. You can see
I get the color is green. Now, what happens if I make a mistake? Suppose
I put four, zero, one, two, three, oops, there\'s no four. Let\'s see
what I get over here. You\'re going to get mistakes. You\'re going to
have errors and this said, the color is yellow because the else ran.
Which is not really what I wanted. But it is sort of doing that kind of
thing or let\'s see what happens if we do what happens if I make a
mistake and I forget to put commas in here. This is a common mistake
that I see from students is they\'ll forget to put the commas in the
array, what happens if I do that? Uncaught Syntax Error: Unexpected
string on line 29. So that gives you a notion that you should come back
and take a look at line 29 and see what\'s going on in there. And
hopefully, with this stuff in here this little red underline stuff going
on here. You\'ll see that something\'s wrong there, and you\'ll put the
comments back in very common mistake. When we\'re starting with this
thing, okay, so you can try these different, try these different scripts
and see how they work and what they do. It\'s really helpful to do that.

# 2.09 Switch Statements (5:06) {#switch-statements-506 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image103.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

JavaScript also has a switch statement which will take a value like
selected color and run it through a bunch of cases. In case it\'s red,
it\'ll do this, in case it\'s blue, it\'ll do that, in case it\'s green,
it\'ll do that, and then at the bottom there\'s a default, you can add a
default and it\'ll do this if none of these other ones are true. It\'s
important with selection that you add this break in here as well. The
break will bump out of this switch when one of these true statements
comes up. Let\'s take a look at this really quickly and see what we get
over here. I\'m going to go in here, I\'m going to comment out these
if-else statements. Again, I\'m going to \"Select\" them and then do
\"Option\" or \"Alt Shift\" A in Visual Studio Code to quickly just
comment this out, so I\'m not running that anymore. Then down here, we
can run a switch statement, switch parentheses and I\'m going to put in
here the value in checking its selected color. Then the switch
statement, I\'m just going to paste it in here because it\'s a little
bit tedious to watch me type it all. But I\'m going to paste it in here,
but I recommend that you type it. Type out, case, red:console.log. The
color is red and then a semicolon, so that\'s the statement that is
going to run and then break and it can be on the same line on the slide
I have it on the next line, but you can put it on the same line here,
rather than watch me type all of these, I\'m going to just paste them in
here. But you should type it in because learning the syntax, you\'ll
learn it by typing it, not by watching me do it. Go ahead and make these
files and type these in here so we can test it out. Then notice I\'ve
got red, green, blue, and yellow, and up here, if I set select the color
to three, I should get 0,1, 2, 3, I should get yellow. Let\'s see if I
get that if I come over here and test this. Ensure enough the color is
yellow, that\'s coming up great. I could change this to zero, which will
get me the first one. Now I\'ve got red and that break is bumping me out
of there. But if I were to set it to something past the end of my array,
so 0, 1, 2, 3, if I set it to have four, the default will run and I get
there was an error because I\'m outside of my array, so the default
option ran down here. I didn\'t actually create a JavaScript there, I
could do that really easily by doing something like and I spelled break
wrong. It even looks different in my code because it\'s not the right
color, so I could do that, see what that does. Now it\'s still running
it there because it didn\'t actually run that line because that line
wasn\'t true. If I set this up here to one, I think I\'ll get an error.
Uncaught reference error, breek is not defined on line 47. It did get
the color is green, I\'ve got that far in the script, and then it
\[inaudible\] into a problem because I misspelled that. I misspell
things all the time, you will too, don\'t worry about it happens all the
time. Break or what if you forget a semicolon? Sometimes say \"I\'m
forgetting a semi-colon, \" will really set it off as well. Unexpected
token break and line 47. These syntax error, unexpected token, what does
that mean? It\'s really expecting a semicolon token here and it seemed
break instead, so it\'s confused by that. But these syntax errors, these
error messages are sometimes a little bit cryptic and they take a little
time to get used to them. But the switch statement is a great
alternative for the, I\'ll say if it takes up less space and it can help
you be very concise and specific with your code in a way that\'s helpful
and useful

# 2.10 Using && (6:24) {#using-624 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image104.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

In JavaScript, we can check to see if multiple things are true by using
the ampersand operator, or the pipe operator. We\'ll look at the pipe
operator next, but here we\'re using the ampersand operator, and we use
two of them together here. And what we do is, we check to see if this
statement is true, and if this statement is true. And for this whole
thing to be true, when you use the AND operator, both of these must be
true in order for this to run. So I have to be in a good mood and have
gotten sleep, in order for today to be a good day. If either one of
these is false, then I\'m going to be grumpy. So let\'s just test this
one really quickly, because I think it\'s just a good idea to practice
typing these. So I\'m going to come in here, I\'m going to turn this one
off. Again, Option or Alt+Shift+A comments it out. And then I\'m going
to do var goodMood, and set that to true, var gotSleep, and set that to
true. And then I\'m going to say if, whoops, if(goodMood && gotSleep),
if both of those are true, then I can console.log, Today is a good day,
else, console.log(\"I am grumpy!\") Now, we can test this, and we can
see that because both of these are set to true, the if statement is
going to run. Today is a good day. However, if I were to go in and
change it so that one of these was false, it doesn\'t matter which one,
then this whole statement will come back false. And I\'m grumpy, so
that\'s kind of an important tool in our tool kit, is we can check to
see if two things are true. If two things are true, then we can do
something. If either one of them is false, then something else is going
to have to happen. Now, we can also use the double pipe. The pipe is the
key on the American keyboard above the Return key, Shift, and that key
up there. It\'s also got the backslash on it, okay? So we could also use
the pipe. So, and the pipe is different in that it\'s an OR statement.
So here, gotBreakfast is true, gotLunch is true, but gotDinner is false.
But if any one of these is true, then the if statement rings as true. So
they would all have to be false for me to be starving. Let\'s give it a
try. Comment all this out. Var gotBreakfast = true, var gotLunch = true,
var gotDinner = false. If(gotBreakfast \|\| gotLunch \|\| gotDinner), if
any of those is true, then console.log(\"things are ok!\"). I forget
what I put on my slide, but that\'s good enough. And then down here,
else console.log(\"I am STARVING\"). And there we go, so I can test this
over here. And you could see, things are ok, even though one of those
would false. I would have to make all of these false, To really be
starving, and there we go. Great, you\'ve learned a lot about Booleans
in this lesson, what\'s true and what\'s false. And that some things are
true-ish, and some things are false-ish, or falsy and truthy. 0 is
considered false in JavaScript, or undefined, or null, or not a number
is false. These are all considered false in JavaScript. And you\'ve
already learned a lot of the basics of JavaScript, and we\'re going to
keep going with these basics. And I know that these scripts don\'t seem
particularly interesting yet. But I promise, if you hang in there and
keep working on this, then we will start making some interesting things
pretty quickly. And we\'ll start manipulating content on web pages,
doing all kinds of interesting stuff, so hang in there, keep going. And
if you haven\'t had breakfast, lunch, or dinner, you\'re probably
starving, so you should go eat something.

### 2.10.Additional Resources: Reading-Materials.pdf

# 2.11 Loops (6:23) {#loops-623 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image105.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

Loops in JavaScript. We\'ve already done quite a bit of JavaScript
already. We\'ve looked at variables and we\'ve looked at arrays, and
we\'ve looked at how to use selections to choose if something is true or
not, Booleans. The next piece of the puzzle is loops. Frequently, you
need to iterate through a number of values and do something with them
when you\'re programming. And JavaScript, like many programming
languages, will allow you to do loops. The most basic loop is a for
loop. And you\'ll see here that in the for loop, we start out with an
initialized value. And then we check if the value is less than some
number. And then each time through the loop, we increment that value.
The best way to explore this is to actually try it out. So I recommend
opening up your code editor and following along with me. Here, I have
just a file called loop study HTML saved on my desktop, and I\'m going
to add a loop in this script down here. So over here, I\'m just going to
make a little room here. There we go, and I\'m going to add a for loop.
And there we go. And then in here, we\'re going to, I\'m going to just
make a little space there so it\'s a little easier to see. But I\'m
going to make a variable var i. And i can be anything. It could be X, it
could be Y, it could be J, it could be the word counter. It\'s just a
variable. i is fairly common to use because it can stand for
incrementer. I don\'t know, it\'s a fairly common one to use but it
doesn\'t have to be that it could be something else if you want. But
I\'m going to start i at 0. And then I\'m going to check while i is less
than, say 10. And then each time through the loop, I\'m going to
increment i, i++. i++ is a shortcut for i = i+1 one, like so. So we
could take i, add 1 to it and then assign it back to i. So if i starts
at 0, the next time to the loop will take 0, add one to it, which gives
us 1 and assign it back to i. So now i is 1 and then the next into the
loop will take 1, add 1 to it, assign it back to i so now it\'s 2, so on
and so forth. But a shortcut for that is i++. So that\'s an incrementer.
Okay, great. So there we have it. And then here we have, let\'s just do
console.log(i), there we go. And so what this is going to do is we\'re
going to set i to 0. So, the console log will run. And it will say,
it\'ll give us a 0. And then we come back and we increment i. So that we
take 0 and we add 1 to it. So now it\'s 1. Is 1 less than 10? Yes, it
is. Since 1 is less than 10, it will console.log(i) again, which is now
1, and then it\'ll increment 1 again. So i will go from 1 to 2 and then
is 2 less than 10? Yes it is. So we\'ll console log out a 2. And then
we\'ll increment i again, we\'ll take 2 and we\'ll increment it to 3. Is
3 less than 10? Yes it is. We\'ll console log out a 3, and so on and so
forth until we get to 9. We get to 9, we\'ll console log out the 9 and
then i gets incremented to 10. Is 10 less than 10? No, it\'s not. So
then the loop will stop and we\'ll bust out of the loop at that point.
But let\'s give this a try. I\'m going to save this. And then I\'m going
to go to the browser, okay, I have over here. And I have this file
loaded here. And I can just run it and you\'ll see that my loop ran.
Line 13 ran ten times starting with 0, 0 through 9. So, that works and
that\'s great. Now, I don\'t have to start with 0. If I wanted to go
from if I wanted to count from 1 to 10, I could start with 1 and say,
well i is less than 11 and that\'ll work just fine. And now I\'ve got a
1 to 10. I could even say, well, I want it to be less than or equal to
10. So then that\'ll actually work as well. So that\'s less than or
equal, that\'s less than or equal operator, greater than or equal would
be this one. And we want less than or equal. And you\'ll see I get the
exact same result. You also don\'t have to start i at 1 or 0, you can
start out anywhere. If I wanted to, I could start at 37 and go till I\'m
at 63. I want to i++. And then if I go back and do that, you\'ll see
that the loop we\'ll do those numbers. So, there are a lot of different
ways of creating loops in JavaScript and we\'ll be looking at a few
different methods throughout this course. But the for loop with these
three expressions is really your most basic loop. And as we go through
the loop, we evaluate these expressions and that determines whether the
loop runs or not.

# 2.12 Working with Arrays (4:13) {#working-with-arrays-413 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image106.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

One of the places you\'re very likely to come across using loops is if
you have an array of items, you have a group of items and you need to
iterate over that group of items to do something to them. Let\'s take a
look at what that looks like. Here I have a variable called colors,
which is an array. It\'s got red, blue, yellow, and green in it. I\'m
going to loop through each of the colors in the array. If you\'re
wondering with this + \'/n\' is that\'s to create a new line in the
console. Actually I don\'t really need to do that because in fact the
console creates new line for each call anyway. I shouldn\'t have put
this on my slide here, but I forgot to take it off but you can just
ignore it. We can just do it without that, and it\'ll work just fine.
Remember, arrays are zero-indexed. This is element 0, this is element
one, this is element two, this is element three. The length of the array
is four, but 0, 1, 2 and 3. Let\'s go over and give this a try really
quickly. Here I am in the same file I had before. I didn\'t update my
loop, but I added the array with the colors in here. What we would do
down here is we would set i to 0 first, so we get red. While i is less
than four, we\'re going to increment i cause we\'re going to do it for
red, blue, yellow, and green. Down here, I\'m just going to console log
out, colors, square bracket i. The first time through the loop i is 0.
Colors square bracket 0 gives me a red and then i gets incremented to
one. The second time through the loop, i is a one. I go to my colors
array here. Colors square bracket one gives me a blue, i gets
incremented to two. I go up to colors here and I go 0,1, 2. Now colors,
square brackets two is going to give me yellow. I get incremented to
three. Colors three is 0, 1, 2, 3, it\'s going to be a green. I get
incremented to four. Four is no longer less than four and my loop breaks
out. Let\'s give this a try and see if it works. Sure enough, I get my
four colors out in the array. It\'s looping through and doing line 15
four times there. That\'s really useful. Now, generally, this is fine,
this works. But generally we don\'t want to have to put in a number
here. What\'s better is to keep this more general. If I do
colors.length, that\'s also a four, colors.length is four. Now I could
add more colors into my array, and this code will still run. No matter
how many colors I have in my array. I could add in here orange and
purple into the array. This will continue to work because now the length
of my array is six. I don\'t have to update this number every time.
Colors.length will help me make my code more general and allow me to do
that thing more easily. Okay, so we can do that really nicely and loop
through all the colors in the array that way.

# 2.13 The For..Of Loop (6:06) {#the-for..of-loop-606 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image107.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

The basic for loop is a good place to start with loops. There\'s also a
loop that is specifically for working with arrays and it\'s called the
for of loop. Here I have an array of food. You can see there are four
items in here, four foods. I can use for, and I can create a temporary
variable, and I\'m calling it each item, but you could call it X, you
could call it Y you call it I, you call it whatever you want. Each item
of food. Each item with this loop is going to do is it\'s going to go
through this array until the end of the array. Each item the first time
to the loop is going to be grapes. I\'ll cancel out the grapes, and then
since the array is not reached the end yet, it\'ll run again and each
item will become cheese, and then it\'ll become bread, and then it\'ll
become olives. Let\'s give this a try really quickly in our code over
here. I\'m going to just leave the array with colors, but instead of
this for loop, I\'m going to do for var each color of colors. It knows
what colors is because that\'s been defined here. Each color is putting
var here because I\'m creating a new variable there. Then down here I
can do console.log each color. You\'ll see that when this runs over
here, I get each color, I get the same thing. It doesn\'t look any
different. Might be nice to actually make it do something a little bit
different. Come over here and change purple to pink, just so that we can
see that it is actually doing something. Refresh this, and sure, I get
them all again with pink instead. That is actually working. This is a
great tool to use with arrays. There\'s another one called for in that
we\'ll talk about later with objects, but for of is specifically for
arrays. There\'s another method that we\'ll be looking at. It also works
well with arrays that I use a lot when I\'m programming JavaScript, I
tend to use the forEach method, but we\'ll look at that later in the
course. Right now, I just want to get you started with the basics so you
can see how to do this. The basic for-loop is a good place to start for
this great for working with arrays. We can also do something with
strings. Remember strings can be treated like an array. I can actually
make a string and then loop through the length of this thing and
actually alert out each letter one at a time in my console.log there. I
can do that thing. In fact, let\'s give this a try really quickly here
and change this to myString equals here is a text. There we go. I could
do it. I can do it this way, for var i equals 0, log i is less than
myString.length i plus, plus console.log myString square bracket i. I
can do it this way. Comment this out for now. That should work if I
didn\'t type it wrong. Let\'s see if I did it right. Sure enough, each
line has a letter. I could do it that way, or I could even use the for
of loop. I\'m going to try to delete this. I can actually take this,
uncomment this out, and instead of each color, I could do each letter of
myString. Each letter, that\'ll work too. Now I\'m going to get it
twice. I\'m going to get the loop twice. I\'m going to get the first
loop, which is the first one, and then I get the second loop. It\'s
actually running twice. That\'s actually working really nicely. You can
actually treat a string like an array in that way and that\'s really a
very interesting feature of JavaScript.

# 2.14 While Loops (13:08) {#while-loops-1308 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image108.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

JavaScript also has a while loop and we don\'t see them as often while
we\'re programming with JavaScript, but they are worth knowing about.
Let\'s take a look at them really quickly. Here we can see the way the
while loop works is we start off, we have an incrementor, and then I\'m
making a variable that starts as an empty string. That\'s maybe not
quite as necessary but you have to have the incrementor outside of the
while loop when you\'re using a while loop. Then while the while loop is
less than 10, I\'m going to do this stuff and then increment the
incrementor at the bottom of the while loop. This is going to run,
incrementor gets set to one, one is less than 10, so this runs again.
Incrementor gets set to two, two is less than 10, so this runs again, so
on and so forth. Then notice when the loop is done, once this increments
up to 10, 10 is no longer less than 10, so I\'ll bump out of the while
loop. This console log is

going to run text. What I\'d like you to notice here is this plus
equals, this text is starting out as empty and plus equals is saying
each time this thing runs, add to what was there before. The first time
through the loop, there\'s nothing in there. It\'s going to add the
incrementor has gone up to plus incrementor, so that\'s going to be a
zero, and then a new line, and then the incrementor gets incremented to
one, and then the next time through the loop, we\'re going to add to
that. It\'s going to add a new line that says the incrementor has gone
up to one. Then it\'s getting increment again then we\'ll say the
incrementor has gone up to two, so on and so forth. Let\'s do this one
in the code editor because I think it\'s really worth seeing this. I\'ve
got my for loop so I\'m just going to comment that stuff out. I don\'t
really need that now. Come down here. I\'m going to make a variable var
incrementor equals zero. Again, it doesn\'t have to be incrementor. You
could leave it out if you wanted to, that would be fine. Then I\'m going
to make var text equals quote, quote. That\'s an empty string. Notice
I\'m using just the single quotes here, but you could do the
double-quotes if you want on my image there. But you could use single
quotes or double quotes. I\'ll put it in double-quotes right now. There
we go. It\'s just an empty string there. Then while incrementor is less
than 10, I\'m going to do something. What I\'m going to do is I\'m going
to say text plus equals, add to what was already there, quote, the
incrementor. What did I put over here? I forget now, has gone up to,
that\'s right. Then I need to have a space there. I\'m going to use a
plus to concatenate in the incrementor variable. It\'s gone up to
whatever that number is and then I\'m going to add a plus and another
set of quotes. Now I need to add the new line. In this case, I actually
need the new line because this is not going to get printed out. It\'s
only going to get printed out once after the loop is done. Incrementor
plus. Then down here I\'m going to print the console log once with all
the text in it. There\'s one print to the console log. Let\'s give that
a try. If I didn\'t mess anything up here, let\'s see. There we go; 0,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. If I didn\'t put the slash n on the end here,
let\'s see if this does, but I think it\'ll do. There we go. I don\'t
get the new lines. The slash n is adding new lines over here after each
one of these, because this is just getting printed out once. That\'s
really important to understand about the way this incremented and the
way the while loop works here. When we look at this image here, we\'re
using the plus sign to concatenate the string together with the
variable. We talked about this before. The plus sign in JavaScript does
double duty. It\'s used to add numbers together the way you would
normally expect the plus sign to work, but it\'s also used to
concatenate strings and things together. Here we\'ve got a string of
text and then we\'re concatenating in the variable and then another
string of text concatenated onto the end of that. It gets complicated to
work this way. It\'s not very intuitive. We can\'t just leave
incrementor inside the quotes because then the string would just say the
incrementor is gone up to incrementor. JavaScript would know that this
is a variable if we just put this inside the quotes. With ES6, which
you\'ll remember is the version of JavaScript that was released in 2015.
They introduced something called template literals that will allow us to
work with variables inside strings a little bit more easily. Let\'s take
a look at how to do that. Here we have the template literal, and what
the template literal the way it works is we put a tick mark on either
end. The tick mark is not a quote. The tick mark is a separate character
on your keyboard. On the American keyboard, it is the character with the
tilde just above the Tab key. That\'s a tick mark there and a tick mark
there. Then we can just put the variable inside curly braces with a
dollar sign and JavaScript will know to treat that as a variable. This
is a much more readable way of working with strings, with variables in
them. This particular string is not terribly complicated or complex in
any way. But sometimes if you\'re constructing a piece of HTML and
you\'ve got tags and tags have their attributes in them, which have
quotes and equals signs it can get really confusing really quickly. This
will really help you out and we\'ll be using the template literals
throughout the rest of this course quite a lot. Let\'s switch our codes
that we\'re using this over here. The way we do this is, I\'m going to
put in a tick mark there and at the end I\'m going to put in a tick mark
and then I can get rid of these quotes and pluses. Then because this is
a variable, I\'m going to put a dollar sign, a curly brace, and another
curly brace. By the way, if you\'re constructing a string that has
variables, this is how I recommend that you do it, rather than just
typing from left to right, type it like this. The incrementor has gone
up to incrementor and then go in and add the dollar sign and the curly
braces. You\'ll find it easier to understand what you\'re doing and to
not make mistakes and do all that stuff if you do it this way. But
you\'ll notice if I do this and save it and then go back and run the
page over here. I mean, I just ran it, but it looks exactly the same and
I am getting my variables over here. That is actually working. If you
wanted to see if it was actually doing something different, we could
start here with 1 and go to 11. See what that looks like. There we go,
1-10, very nice. That\'s great. We\'ve got the template literals that\'s
really useful and we\'re going to take a look at one more example.
What\'s interesting here is we can actually do expressions inside our
curly braces here. Rather than just sticking a variable in there, we can
actually perform JavaScript operations right in line with our string.
Let\'s give this a try. I set the incrementor to i to keep it shorter
here. Let\'s do that. Over here I\'m going to set this to just i, i is
one word, we\'ll start it at 0. I\'m sure we\'ll leave it at one. Do it
like this. The incrementor is i and the incrementor squared is i times
i. But this is going to be a variable and so is this. This is going to
be an expression. Maybe I want some spaces in there make that a little
bit more readable. There we go. Let\'s go see what that does. We go over
here and run that. Incrementor is not defined. Line 25, down here that
needs to be changed to i. That\'s very typical mistake. It\'s great that
these things come up while I\'m doing this because you can see how I fix
them. I could see right here that was on line 25 and knew immediately
that I had forgotten to change the incrementor to is. I just wasn\'t
exactly sure where it was and that I did not save it over there. This
one here also. There we go. I\'m getting my squares over here as well.
That\'s working great. Loops are one of the fundamental building blocks
in JavaScript. It\'s important to get comfortable with the syntax needed
to create them. I recommend just sitting down and getting to the point
where you can type out a for loop. I know that it looks a little weird
at first, but you have to just keep working at it so you can get to the
point where you could sit down and say, I\'m just going to write out a
for loop and when you get there, then you\'ll know that you have the
loops really down pat. Great, we\'re going to a move on to the next
thing.

# Additional Resource {#additional-resource .unnumbered}

Here is a resource related to these lessons:

### 2.14.[JavaScript Loops](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_loop_for.asp) (shortcut)

https://www.coursera.org/learn/javascript-basics/supplement/vqikT/additional-resource

https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_loop_for.asp

# 2.15 Structured Programming, Sequence - Part 1 (4:43) {#structured-programming-sequence---part-1-443 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image109.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

Sequence selection and loop. In this lesson, we\'re going to put
together some of what you\'ve already learned and what you\'ve already
been doing and see if we can make some sense out of it. In Structured
Programming, we make use of these three structures we\'ve already
started working with. Sequence, 1st, you do this, then you do that,
finally, you do this over here. With JavaScript, you start at the top of
the script and you work your way down the script and JavaScript does
everything in the script one thing at a time in a sequence. With
selections, we\'re checking to see if some condition is met. If this is
true, do this, otherwise, do that. Then with loops, while a condition is
true, we\'re going to continue to do something. With the scripts that we
have next, we\'re going to learn a little bit about JavaScript string
methods, while also practicing some of these techniques you\'ve already
learned a little bit about with loops and selections and these kinds of
things. Hopefully, you\'ll start to see the expressive power of
JavaScript. Over here I have some of the different string methods you
can do. To start with, we\'re going to work with the toUpperCase method
here. We can actually take a string of text, assign it to a variable,
and then take that variable and do.toUpperCase, and that\'s a method
that will take that string and convert it into an uppercase string. Or
you can convert it to lowercase. If you come to this page, you\'ll
notice and further down the page here, but there\'s all different things
we can do with strings; to replace content, to find content, to do all
kinds of things with strings. We can take pieces of strings out of
strings, we can perform string surgery. This page is very useful to
explain some of the different things that we can do with strings of
text. You might be wondering, well, why would I want to do anything with
a string of text? Why would I want to do this stuff? But if you think
about it, a web page from the very first character of the web page to
the very last character of a web page is nothing but a string of text.
If I were to right-click on this page and do the page source, you can
see it starts with a character, and down at the bottom, way, way down at
the bottom, it ends with a character. This is one long string of text.
From that perspective, every web page is really just a string. If we can
do things with strings, we can affect web pages. Not that we\'re going
to do it that way very often, but you actually can do it that way, which
is pretty cool. Let\'s go forward with this and see what we\'re doing
here. The first thing we\'re going to do is create a variable called
myString and assign it the following string, \"I\'m really hungry for
some\" and then use the console log to print out that string. Then make
a new variable called myUpperString and use the string method to
capitalize all the text in the first string and then print out the
capitalized version in the console. Can you do that on your own? Try to
do it using this toUpperCase string method here. You can pause the video
and come back and see how I did it. When you\'re ready, unpause the
video, and let\'s see if you got the same thing I got. Did you get
something like this? I have the same thing over here in my Visual Studio
Code. I left out the spaces, but this is the same thing here. Created a
variable myString, assigned some text to it, I\'m console logging that
out, then make a new variable called myUpperString, which is my string
toUpperCase with the parenthesis. This is a string method. We\'re going
to talk about methods and functions and all that in a little bit, but
for right now, understand that method has these parenthesis at the end.
It\'ll take myString and convert it into uppercase, and then I can
console log that out and assign it to this and console log that out.
That works really great. I can come over here and see that that actually
runs, and I\'ve got both of my strings. One of them is lowercase, and
one of them is uppercase. That works great. Let\'s see, what should we
do next.

# 2.16 Sequence -- Part 2 (5:42) {#sequence-part-2-542 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image110.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

Next, we\'ll do some more surgery on our strengths. What, we\'re going
to do first here is we\'re going to pull out the word \'\'really\'\'. So
I\'m going to make a variable called reallyLocation, and I\'m going to
use the search method to find out where this word \'\'really\'\' in my
string starts. What this is going to return is a number of that
location. So let\'s do that first. Var reallyLocation equals
myString.search really. Then I\'m just going to console log out
reallyLocation just so you see you can see exactly what that\'s getting.
Assuming I did that right and I did. That\'s getting a five. What that
means is that if I count from here 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, this is character
Number 5. It starting at a five. How many characters do I want to get?
I\'m going to get six characters. So I\'m going to use the substring
function or method here, and I\'m going to pass in reallyLocation which
is location five, and I\'m going to get six characters. What that\'s
going to do is it\'s going to pull out into this variable, special word,
the word \'\'really\'\'. It\'s going to start at five from myString and
get six characters. So let\'s do that. Var specialWord equals
string.substring, and I\'m going to start with reallyLocation and get
six characters. If I console log special word, you\'ll see that what
that\'s getting for me. Oops. I misspelled. It\'s myString, isn\'t it?
MyString with a capital S? There we go. Now I\'m getting the word
\'\'really\'\'. Great. So I\'ve got that, now I\'m going to take
specialWord and assign it back to itself, but uppercased. I\'m going to
say specialWord, I\'m going to assign it specialWord.toUpperCase. So now
it\'s going to be uppercase, and then what I\'m going to do is I\'m
going to make a newString and I\'m going to replace \'\'really\'\' with
specialWord into the original myString here, and then I\'ll console log
out newString. So let\'s do that. Var newString equals myString.replace.
Which order does it go in? I\'m going to replace \'\'really\'\' with
specialWord. SpecialWord like so and then I\'ll console. Console.log
newString. What I should get is I am really hungry for some, so I\'m
getting the capital word \'\'really\'\' there. But this is a sequence,
JavaScript is doing a sequence of things, one thing after another,
we\'re just doing a sequence of things here. JavaScript goes through the
script one step at a time, and we\'re just learning about some string
methods along the way. We\'ve learned about a few of them already,
uppercase and replace and search and substring, and there\'s a lot more
here that you can go through and learn. But that\'ll get you started to
begin with the various string methods that are available in JavaScript
for doing string surgery.

# 2.17 Sequence - Part 3, Loop (5:42) {#sequence---part-3-loop-542 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image111.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

For the next step in our sequence, make an array called foods and put
four foods in the array. Then use the string literal syntax. So we can
practice that to print out a sentence that prints to the console the
variable myString, which we declared earlier, and follow that with a
space and then the first element in the foods array. See if you can do
that. Pause the video and see if you can do that without looking at the
answer that I have next and when you\'re done, unpause the video and
come back and we\'ll see how I did it. Did you get something like this?
I have myString in here again, but you shouldn\'t need that because we
already have that on our file but you should have an array and then the
console.log with the template literal, takes a little getting used to
the template literal thing. Let\'s do that part together. So over here
you can see I\'ve added the array and then here I need to add the
template literal. So I\'m going to do, and the way to do this, the best
way to do this is to just type the variables myString. Then I want a
space and I want foods square bracket 0. But these are variables. So
I\'m going to come in here and add a dollar sign and a curly brace, and
a curly brace. Then a dollar sign and a curly brace and the curly brace
around it. If you do it that way, you\'ll understand it better if you
always work from the inside out or the outside in, in this case, we\'re
working from the inside out. But if you work that way, it\'ll make it
easier for you to understand. Then over here I can actually run that and
I should be getting, \"I am really hungry for some cheese\". So that
works perfectly well. Okay, great. The next thing to do is to see if you
can use a loop and loop through all of the elements in the array. I\'m
really hungry for some cheese, for some pie, for some lunch, for some
breakfast. All of these elements. So let\'s see if we can do that. Go
ahead and try it. See if you can write the loop for yourself. Pause the
video again and see if you can write it. Try using the for loop. Try
using the for-of loop. See which one feels better to you. Try them both.
Hopefully, you got it for yourself, but I\'m going to do it here just so
you can see how I do this for and then I\'m going to come in here and
I\'m going to say var i equals 0. So I\'m going to start at 0. For i is
less than foods.length. Now I could stick in here a four instead of
foods.length, but this is better practice. Foods.length i plus, plus.
Then I\'m going to console.log out this line here. We\'re just going to
stick that in there. But instead of food 0, I\'m going put an i in there
because i is going to get each one of these. In fact, just so you don\'t
get confused, I\'m going to comment that line out there just so I can
see that this is really working. First time through the loop, i is 0, so
it\'s going to print out, I\'m really hungry for some space food square
bracket 0 because i is 0, i gets incremented to one. So the second time
through the loop, one is less than four because remember this is going
to be a four. So it\'ll go through again and you\'ll get pie. Then the
third time through the loop it\'s going to get breakfast, and the fourth
time through the loop it\'s going to get lunch. Then i gets incremented
to four because it\'s 0, 1, 2, 3. So i is going to get incremented to
four, four is not less than four. So the loop will bust out. Let\'s see
if that works. There we go. We\'re getting all of it there. That\'s
great. Now, what if you wanted to use the for-of loop? I\'m going to
just comment that out. For var, eachFood of foods, something like that
will work. It doesn\'t have to be eachFood, you could do i if you wanted
to. Then in here, we\'re going to do the same thing. We\'re just going
to basically take this and stick it here, but now instead of foods, this
foods i, this is going to be eachFood. I\'m still going to print out
myString, but now this is going to be eachFood. The first time through
the loop, eachFood is going to be cheese. Then the second time through
the loop it\'s going to be pie and then it\'s going to be breakfast, and
then it\'s going to be lunch. We should get exactly the same results so
let\'s go test it out to be sure. Sure enough, I get the same results.

# 2.18 Loop + Selection (8:20) {#loop-selection-820 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image112.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

Next we\'ll bring selection into the mix. Now, inside our loop, we\'re
going to check to see if the element in the loop is even or odd. If
it\'s even, we\'re going to make the word for the food that we\'re
getting out of the array all uppercase like this over here. This should
be your results. I am hungry for some CHEESE, all capital letters there,
and I am hungry for some pie and that one\'s normal, and then LUNCH is
going to be uppercase. Now you might be wondering, well, wait a minute,
that\'s not even. But remember we\'re starting with zero so this is
zero, this is one, this is two, this is three. These two really are the
even ones. In JavaScript, you can determine if something is even or odd
by using the modulus operator, which is the percent sign. We can figure
out when we divide something and use the percent sign if the remainder
is zero, then it\'s even if you divide something by two. So we can use
that to help us figure out which of these is even or odd. See if you can
figure it out. Pause the video and see if you can figure that out, see
if you can try it for yourself. You might have to mess around with the
modulus operator, takes a little getting used to, but try working with
it a little bit and see if you can figure that out and get this result.
Let\'s do this together. Here I am with my loop and I got rid of the for
of loop. This one\'s really going to work better because we already have
i working as an incrementor with numbers. So we can just work with i to
do this. Initially, I\'m going to add this var remainder i percent two.
Now, what that\'s going to do is each time through the loop, it\'s going
to take i and divide it by two and see what the remainder is. The first
time through the loop, I take zero. Zero divided by two is zero. That\'s
going to be a zero, that\'s even. One divided by two is not zero. Two
divided by two is zero, so on and so forth. If remainder is exactly the
same as zero, we could do same as, but just to be absolutely sure,
exactly the same as zero. If it\'s exactly the same as zero, then what
we\'re going to do is we\'re going to make a variable var foodUpper and
assign it foods \[ i \]. That\'s going to get that first food, whatever
i is there and due toUpperCase. Then I\'m going to print out basically
this. But instead of foods i down there, I can print out this one here.
I think that\'ll work. Else we\'ll just do this. Save that. Did I do it
right? Let\'s see. Refresh my page here and look at that it\'s working.
That\'s great. Did you get something like that? That\'s great. One last
thing I want to talk about or really the next thing I want to talk about
is refactoring code. Often we will write code the first time and then
look at it later and realize that could be a little bit simpler. I could
simplify that a little bit. Refactoring code is the process of taking
your code and not changing its functionality at all, but making it
simpler, finding ways of making it shorter and making it more concise,
making it more readable. Sometimes those things don\'t all go together.
Sometimes making it more concise, makes it less readable. But really
you\'re looking for the right balance of conciseness and readability
when you\'re refactoring your code. We could take that same piece that
we wrote and refactor it a little bit so that we could get rid of that
extra variable here. Let\'s do that really quickly over here. I don\'t
really need to do this here. I could actually do this right in here.
Then I can get rid of this variable, remainder. I don\'t really need
that there. That simplifies things a little bit. Then here also
foodUpper, I could just take this foods i to uppercase and stick it in
here. Then I can get rid of this line too. You can see how that shortens
things up a little bit. Often when we\'re writing things for the first
time, we\'ll make it more complicated than it needs to be. Frequently,
students will tell me when they\'re working through my examples they\'ll
say, \"Oh, wow, I tried it and I ended up with way more code than you
did. Yours is much more concise.\" Well, that\'s because I\'ve
refactored mine down quite a bit. Nobody writes it perfectly the first
time so don\'t feel bad about that. Always just keep working at it, look
for ways of taking your code and saying, you know what, this could be a
little bit simpler. I\'m going to take that, I\'m going to save it and
I\'m going to just make sure that it still runs exactly the same way.
Make sure I did that right, and I did, so that\'s fine. Another thing
you can do that\'s really helpful is make comments. If you\'re not
really sure that you can refactor something down, but then it can become
less readable and it can be helpful to put comments in there to help you
make sure when you come back to it later that you know what you did and
that it will make sense to your future self. You can go ahead and come
in here and add comments. I\'ll put it up here. Checking to see if the
incrementor is even. Something like that will be helpful later perhaps
and you could add more comments in here. As you refactoring, be sure to
do that as well. Once you\'ve added your comments and refactored your
code, you\'ve done a great job at working with sequence selection and
loops. We\'re going to get more practice with those as pretty much every
script that we write will have some combination of them as we go along.
Great, see you in the next lesson.

# 2.19 JavaScript Basic Challenges Introduction (5:02) {#javascript-basic-challenges-introduction-502 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image113.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

JavaScript basic challenges. This course includes a number of
challenges, and these challenges will help you become better at writing
JavaScript and becoming a JavaScript programmer. I encourage you to take
the time you need to, to get good at working through these challenges
and to be able to do the challenges and get the correct results. The way
the challenges work is, I\'ll give you a challenge. This first one is
fairly simple. Write a script that prints out your first name on one
line, your last name on the next line. Very basic challenge. But what
you should do is set up your file. I have a file set up here, and then
you\'ll come in here, and it\'s very normal to be, \"Okay, what do I do
first?\" I don\'t even know what the first thing is to do, and that\'s
fine. You can always come over and look at the answer for the challenge
will be on the next slide, and you can look at that and go, \"Okay,
yeah, that makes sense. We did that in the other lesson, I know how to
do that.\" Then, come back and actually write that, var firstName
equals, \"Bill\", and I\'ve forgotten what to do next, and that\'s
normal. This is typical. Go and look again, if you have to. Look again
and see what you need to do next, and then go back and actually type it
without looking at the slide. What this will do, this will do a few
things to really help you get good at JavaScript. First, what it\'ll do
is it\'ll help you with the syntax of the language. Remember this slide.
Remember we need to get over this first hump of the camel. We need to
get over that first hump, which is learning the syntax of the language.
The way to learn the syntax of the language is to type it. When you\'re
working on this, even if you\'re looking at the answer and then having
to come in here and just remember it for a few seconds, that will help
you learn the syntax and get better at it over time, and I promise it
will help. Over time, you\'ll really start to be able to do these
without having to look at the slides if you keep working at it. Look at
the answers if you have to, they\'re here, and then type it without
looking at the answer. The second thing that I\'ll do for you is these
challenges build on each other. The second challenge is a little bit of
a baby step beyond the first challenge. I\'ve designed these challenges
such that they build up in small baby steps like this so that over time,
you\'re taking an idea and expanding it into a larger, more complex
script as you go along, and that will help you with this second hump on
the camel. Learning how to solve problems with JavaScript. You get good
at learning how to solve problems first by solving very small problems
in making baby steps, and these challenges, we\'ll help you do that. I
recommend you do these challenges to the point where you can do them
without looking at the answers because that will really help you with
the syntax and meanwhile, you\'re building up some skill for how to take
a small thing and then build on it. Now, there\'s nothing magical about
these challenges. I also recommend you come up with your own challenges.
Try things out. See if you can make a small thing work. If you can make
that small thing work, then build on it and see what other ideas you
have and see if you can build on those. That is a great way to learn
JavaScript, and it\'s fun. It\'s fun to see if you can do that kind of
thing. By doing these challenges, by working through these examples and
by getting really good at them, you will build your skills with
JavaScript. If you don\'t, you don\'t have to. You can continue to watch
the videos and do the quizzes in the videos, and you\'ll learn about
JavaScript. But in order to actually become a JavaScript programmer, you
have to write JavaScript. You have to take the time to really sit down
and write it. Even if you\'re coming to JavaScript from another language
like C plus plus or Java, or Python or some other language and you might
be thinking, oh yeah, I know what loops are, and I know what if
statements are, and those kinds of things. I really recommend you sit
down and write JavaScript because it\'s a little bit different and it
takes practice. Great. Keep working on these and get really good at the
challenges and I promise, you\'ll be on the road to becoming a good
JavaScript developer.

### 2.19.JavaScript-Basic-Challenges.pdf

https://www.coursera.org/learn/javascript-basics/supplement/9clcg/javascript-basic-challenges-01-09

# 2.20 Functions in JavaScript (5:29) {#functions-in-javascript-529 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image114.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

Functions in JavaScript. Functions are reusable sets of instructions.
For example, in the sequence selection and loop exercise, you\'re adding
a bunch of script to the page and it was getting messy. There\'s a lot
of single lines of code all piling up without a lot of order,
organization to them. What we can do with functions is we can take that
stuff, stick it inside of something that has a name, and then run that
function when we want to run that set of instructions. We can make
functions so that they\'re reusable, so that you can use them in
multiple places within your programs, and that\'s where functions can
become very powerful. Here, I have a function called doStuff, which is
going to run something similar to what we did in the sequence selection
and loop exercise. Let\'s give this a try real quick. I\'m going to
switch over to my code editor over here. You can see, I\'ve already set
up a file and I recommend you do the same. It just needs to notify
within each one, and I\'ve got a script here, and I\'ve got some of the
script from our sequence selection and loop exercise. Now, I\'m going to
add a function. To do that, I would just define a function here.
Function is the function keyword doStuff, parentheses and curly braces.
Now, this stuff can just go inside the curly braces, like that. Probably
best to tab it in so it\'s clear that it\'s all inside there. That\'s
inside of there. Then you have to run the function doStuff. We define
the function which tells it what it does, then we invoke or call or run
the function. Any of those verbs will do: invoke, call or run. I can
save that and I can come over to my pagers, and this is that same page,
and I can run this, and you can see that the function runs and it does
its thing. It\'s very normal when you start doing this, and sometimes I
still do it to forget to call the function, which will mean that you\'ll
get nothing, because it\'ll be defined but it won\'t actually run, so
it\'s not actually running there. I have to run doStuff. Normally, I
would do that here in the file, doStuff. We\'ll run that function.
Here\'s a good thing to try. Go back to the basic challenges that we
just did and pull one of them out of there, and turn it into a function.
I use challenge number 7. But you could use any of them really. See if
you can turn it into a function and run it. Pause the video, and when
you come back, we\'ll see what you got. I hope you were able to try
that. I went and got challenge number 7 and I have it over here, so
here\'s challenge number 7. How would I take that and turn it into a
function? Well, I could do it like this; I could take all of this stuff
and I can come over here, and I can go ahead and just paste it right on
my page here, right in my file down here at the bottom. I\'m going to
just paste it on in there. But I\'m going to make a new function. What
is this thing doing? Well, it\'s checking a number. I\'m going to make a
function called checkNum, parentheses, curly braces, like so. Then I\'m
going to take this stuff, I\'m going to stick it inside of checkNum, tab
that in. It\'s clear that this curly brace is ending that curly brace
and everything is inside. It\'s always good to be clear about your
indenting if you possibly can, it really does help. Then down here, I\'m
going to run checkNum, and let\'s see what happens. Over here when I run
my script, it says enter a whole number, 54, and then you entered a
really big number. My function is running, it\'s functioning, it\'s
doing what it\'s supposed to do, and all that code is now inside of a
function.

# 2.21 Passing In and Returning Data (8:01) {#passing-in-and-returning-data-801 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image115.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

Functions are even more useful if you can pass data into them, so they
can do something with that data. So for example, our first do something
message, the first do something function wasn\'t really useful because
it was just taking that string, and making it uppercase, and then
spitting it back out again. But we could make it more useful by passing
in a message variable, a parameter, this function has a parameter called
message. We could pass in a messages and argument to this function, and
it will take any message, and make it uppercase, and console log it out.
So let\'s give that a try and see what that does. Down here, I\'m going
to comment these out. I\'ll leave the functions, they\'re not going to
hurt anything. I\'m going to comment these out so they don\'t run. And
then I\'m going to make a function, function printMessage, which takes
message as a parameter, Or print uppercase, or I forget, what did I call
it over here? Probably I should make it match with them. upperMessage,
let\'s do that then, upperMessage, that doesn\'t matter really what you
call it. And then I\'m going to take message and I\'m going to say, var
upperMessage = message.toUpperCase. And then I\'m just going to console
log out, upperMessage. Now when I run this, I run upperMessage, but I
pass in, here is a message. I can pass any message in that I want and it
will make it uppercase. Still not super interesting, but it\'s something
that shows us how this actually works. So over here when I run this, my
message is turned into uppercase because that\'s what that function
does. It takes some data and does something to it. And beyond that, we
could do something like add numbers together. Again, not super exciting,
but we could pass in two parameters here. On number one and on number
two, we could add them together and then console log them out. And you
would run this by using addNums, and you would pass in whatever two
numbers you want to add there. Let\'s give it a try real quick. Function
addNums. We\'re going to pass in num1 and num2. I like putting these
extra spaces in here even though that\'s kind of not the standard, but I
think it makes it easier to read for me. All right, so I\'m going to
make var sum = num1 + num2. In here, we\'re using the plus sign to
actually do addition, that\'s what we want it to do. And then I\'m going
to console.log sum. Meanwhile, I\'m going to comment that out so we
don\'t get that running as well. And then down here, I just need to run
it with whatever numbers I want to add, addNums, 329, 419. Sure, you
could probably do that in your head fairly quickly. But why bother? We
can have JavaScript do it for us, right? So, if we\'re going to learn
how to do this JavaScript stuff, it might as well do something useful,
like add those numbers together to get 728. Maybe not super useful, but
you get the idea. And that\'s a really powerful thing about JavaScript
is we can pass in the passing data through these variables here, that we
can then work with within our function. The next thing to talk about is
returning data. So far our functions have just done one thing, they\'ve
printed out to the console log, because that\'s really all we have for
right now. We will be doing more interesting things, I promise. But for
right now, what we have is to print out to the console log. But we can
make functions that return something. And that in this case, it looks
subtle. The difference is subtle because in the end, what we have is the
console. So we\'re printing to the console. But here I\'ve updated my
function, I\'m calling it return sum. And instead of just printing to
the console, and returning the sum of these two numbers, and then I can
console log that out. Again, it\'s just going to the console, so the end
result isn\'t all that different. But there is a subtle but important
difference between these two things. So let\'s do this really quickly.
I\'m going to come over here and I\'m going to just copy my addNumbs
function, and paste it, comment that out for a moment. And instead call
this, returnSum, num1, num2. But instead of console logging it out, I\'m
going to return, return as a key word, sum. So its going to return the
value here. And then I can, again, it\'s just going to go to the console
log because that\'s all I\'ve got access to at the moment. We\'ll be
doing more stuff later. And I can run inside the console log, returnSum
and I can put a 3 and a, 5 in there, whatever. And you\'ll see, when I
run this, Over here, assuming I typed that all right. Then, in fact,
they get an eight, and it\'s still going to the console. So you might
wonder, well, what\'s the big deal here? What\'s the difference here
between returning the sum and just having it print out the finished
thing here? The analogy that I like to use is one, where you\'re washing
your clothes. If you happen to have a washer and a dryer, you have two
machines and those machines work together. So you put your dirty clothes
in the washing machine. So you\'re feeding it in dirty clothes, dirty
laundry, and you\'re putting in soap and you\'re putting in water in the
washing machine, agitates it all, and runs it all together. And what it
returns to you are clean, wet clothes, which you then put into a dryer,
and the dryer will then do its function which will tumble the clothes
with air, hot air maybe, and then returned to you clean, dry clothes. So
you can think of returning as a machine doing something and processing
something, doing something to it, and then returning the result to you
so that you can then turn it over to another machine that has its
special features and does what it needs to do.

# 2.22 Useful Example -- Step 1 (6:21) {#useful-example-step-1-621 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image116.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

Let\'s take a look at a useful example. This will show us something that
a function can do for us in JavaScript right now, and that we could use
in some programs that we write. That is for generating random numbers.
Try this out. JavaScript has a random number generator, and I\'m going
to just give this a try over here on my file. First of all, I\'m going
to comment that out, so I\'m not getting that. But I\'m just going to
console.log math with a capital M dot random. We\'ll talk more about
what that means in a little bit. But math random is going to generate a
random number. If I go over to my browser and run it, you see that I get
a number, I can keep refreshing my screen and I\'ll keep getting
numbers. The numbers that I get will be from zero all the way down to
0.00000000, all the way up to almost one. You saw a minute ago I got a
9.9 something or other. It won\'t go all the way to one. It\'ll go to up
to 0.999999999, something like that. But it won\'t go all the way to
one. It could go all the way to zero, but it won\'t go all the way to
one. But it\'s somewhere in there. What if I wanted random integers?
What if I wanted to get a random number between say, 10 and 52 or
something like that, how would I do that? I need to write a function to
do that in JavaScript because the random number generator in JavaScript
generates random numbers between zero and almost one. Zero inclusive,
one exclusive. So the way that\'s officially set, so we can see that
that\'s what\'s going on here. But if I was playing a game of cards and
I had numbered my cards one through 52, and I wanted to make sure I
could pick a random card, I would need to be able to pull out a 26, not
as 0.35979558399127143. That\'s not very helpful. I need to figure that
out. Before we go forward with this, I should mention that the random
number generator in JavaScript is not truly random. It\'s using an
algorithm to generate the random number and it\'s random enough for our
purposes, but it\'s not a truly random number. If you\'re making a game
that was making a program that really needed to be random, like a
lottery generator or something like that, you would want to use
something other than the built-in random number generator. But for our
purposes is random enough. That\'s worth mentioning as well. Here\'s our
first step in creating our random integer generator, is we\'re going to
make a function called randomInt, and we\'re going to pass in a minimum
number that we want to get, and a maximum number that we want to get in
our random integer generator. To start with, we need to know how many
values we think we should be able to get. I\'m going to make a variable
called a number of values and it\'s going to take max and it\'s going to
subtract min, and it\'s going to add 1 to it. Think of it like this; if
I were to run this function with five and 10, if I wanted to get a
random number that was between five and 10 and included five and 10, the
numbers I could get are 5,6,7,8,9,10. That\'s six possible values. If I
take the maximum which is 10, and subtract 5, that gives me 5 plus 1,
that would give me 6 possible values. That\'s how this actually works.
Let\'s go ahead and go over to our code editor and start writing this
function. When I\'m coming here, I\'m going to comment that out and it
really needs that at the moment. But I\'m going to make a function
called randomInt, and it\'s going to take a min and a max. I\'m going to
have a variable here, var numOfValues. That\'s going to be the max minus
the min plus 1. Like that. Here we go. That looks nice. Great. Then I
can just console log out this number of values just to make sure it\'s
working right. Console.log. When you\'re working with programming, you
want to do this. You want to just check everything as many places as you
possibly can just to make sure you\'re getting what you think you\'re
getting. NumOfValues. I\'m going to console log that out. Then down here
I\'m going to run this function, randomInt. Then put in a five. I\'m
going to put in 10. We\'ll see, we should get a six. That\'s what we
should get. Let\'s go over and check that. Sure enough, I\'m getting a
six because the possible values, if I\'m going to include, I\'m going to
say I want random numbers from 5-10. I want to include five and 10, so I
could get a 5, a 6, a 7, an 8, a 9 or 10, that\'s six possible values.
Step 1 of this is correct. Then, we\'ll go on from there to the next
step.

# 2.23 Useful Example -- Steps 2-4 (6:05) {#useful-example-steps-2-4-605 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image117.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

In the second step for a random integer generator, I\'m going to
actually generate my random number. RandomNum here is going to be
between zero and one. I\'m going to take that and multiply it by the
number of values and see what I get. Let\'s go ahead and add this to our
function over here. We\'ve got that in there, we can get rid of this. We
know that that\'s working, so we know that\'s all good. But now I\'m
going to get var randomNum and have that equal Math.random. That\'s
going to generate my random number. Then I\'m going to say randomVal.
I\'m going to take var randomVal and have that equal randomNum times
number of values. Let\'s just see what that gets us. Console.log
(randomVal). Try that out. Let\'s go over here and run that. Now,
that\'s getting me numbers that are between zero and six. It won\'t go
all the way up to six. It will get me to five point something other, but
it won\'t go all the way up to six, and that\'s interesting. Great.
We\'re making progress. Let\'s see what we need to do next. Next, I\'m
going to use the Math.floor method to round down my random number. Now,
that should get me a whole number between zero and five. I\'m going to
add this variable rounded random value, and I\'m going to use the
Math.floor and pass in this random value here. This is my number with
all the decimal points. I\'m going to put that decimal places only one
decimal point, but the number without the numbers after the decimal
point. There we go. That\'s the way I should say that. Let\'s give that
a try over here. I\'m going to get rid of this console.log, I don\'t
really need that one anymore. But instead, I\'m going to do var
roundedRandomVal. A long variable name, you can make it shorter. I\'m
going to do Math.floor. Floor is a method and ceil is a method, ceil for
ceiling. Floor will round it down, ceil, C-E-I-L, will round it up,
short for ceiling, if that makes sense. Then I\'m going to pass in their
randomVal. Once again, just to see what my progress is, I\'m going to
console.log (roundedRandomVal). You saw I didn\'t have to actually type
that, I just press tab because it came up in Visual Studio code. That
will give me from getting these long variable names wrong. I could just
do R or V or something like that to make it shorter. But that\'s okay.
I\'m just making it match my images here so you get a sense of what\'s
going on here. Now when I run this, I get a two, I get a five, I get a
zero, I get a two, I get a 3, 5, 0. Now, I\'m getting whole numbers, but
they\'re not from 5-10, they\'re between zero and, but I am getting six
of them because I\'m getting 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5. But I\'m not getting
the numbers between my range that I really wanted. But that\'s okay.
Let\'s see what we can do next. Now, what we can do next is we can get
our final number, and we\'re going to take the min and add it to that
randomVal. For example, if our random number gave us a zero and we add
five to it, we\'ll get a five. If we got a one and we add five to it,
we\'ll get a six, all the way up to 10. So that will give us our random
numbers between five and 10 if we add the min value to this final number
here. Let\'s go ahead and add that in there and see what we get. Var
finalNum equals min plus roundedRandomVal, and we can console log that
out. Come back and check it, and you can see now I\'m getting random
numbers that can go as high as 10 and as low as five, and our random
number generator is actually working, which is great.

# 2.24 Useful Example -- Step 5 {#useful-example-step-5 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image118.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

In the next step, we\'re going to make our random number generator, our
random integer generator a little bit more useful. Currently, it works.
We can generate random numbers, but the only thing we can do with these
random numbers is see them pop up in the console, which is really not
very useful. If I wanted to actually take this nine and do something
with it, I can\'t. All this function does currently is print out to the
console. What we could do instead, is we could return the final number.
Return final number. If I could type, that would help. Here, now we can
return the final number and we could actually use this function
somewhere useful. For example, if I had an array var foods equals square
bracket cheese, chicken, grapes, hamburgers, whatever you want to put in
there is fine. We could add more things to the list. But if I wanted to
randomly get an element from this array, because randomInt returns a
number, I know this starts with zero, 0, 1, 2, 3, so I want a random
number from 0-3 in this case. So I could come down here and I could say
console.log. Let\'s say foods square brackets, and in here I\'m going to
pass in randomInt 0, 3. Now, because this randomInt 0, 3 is going to be,
because it returns final number, it\'s going to be a zero, a one, a two,
or a three. So console.log foods randomInt, 0, 3 is going to go into the
array and get me either a cheese, a chicken, or grapes, or hamburgers.
Let\'s see if that works, if I typed it right. Sure enough, I got
hamburgers, and then I got grapes, and then I got chicken. That\'s
working just fine. I can actually use my random number generator to
actually do something with another program. You can think of this,
because this thing returns a random number, I can use that within my
tool here to get something out of this array. Going back to the washing
machine and dryer example, this is my washing machine. It\'s returning
to me a processed number that I can then use with foods to do something.
I don\'t know. It\'s not that interesting, but it\'s a little bit more
interesting than what we\'ve been doing so far. Great. One last thing to
look at and think about for this is that this function is pretty long.
We could refactor it. Remember, we want to refactor as much as we
possibly can. What we could do is we could refactor this thing down
quite a bit here. What we want to return is really this Math.floor
randomVal. I\'m going to take that, I\'m going to stick it down here.
Did I select that right? There we go. I\'m going to return ran, I\'m
going to do that. But in here, what I\'m going to take is I\'m going to
say really what I want is I want this max plus min. I want to put that
in here. I\'m going to put that in its own set of parentheses, max-min
times my Math.random. I\'m going to do that, and then outside of this,
I\'m going to add plus min. I believe that will work. I think I have
that right. Let\'s see if I have that right. I\'m going to comment this
stuff out for the moment. I\'m pretty sure that\'s right because I\'m in
a return. I\'m going to take Math.floor. I\'m going to take my max,
subtract my min, and add 1. Multiply that by Math.random. I\'m going to
round that down and add min. That should be doing the same thing as
this. Let\'s see if I did that right. Over here, if I run this again, I
am still getting my items here. This is a shortened version of all of
this stuff. Now, you might look at this and go, \"Well, I don\'t really
understand what\'s going on here.\" That\'s a great place for a comment.
Here you could say something like, \"Creating a random integer from min
and max.\" Or you can put a more explicit statement in here. Sometimes
taking a big chunk of code and reducing it down to one line can be
difficult to understand exactly what it\'s doing later. But in this
case, I like it. Because if you were to go looking around on the web for
a random integer generator for JavaScript, if you Google that, you\'ll
get statements that look like this, you\'ll get functions that look like
this. You\'ll find them on Stack Overflow and other places. So it\'s
useful in this case. Sometimes these one-line statements where
everything is reduced down become very difficult to read and understand
exactly what they\'re doing. But I think this one\'s pretty good. So I
like it. So that allows us to create a random integer generator that we
then refactor down into one line of code. But by walking through the
steps, you could see each step along the way and how that actually
worked.

# 2.25 More on Functions (10:00) {#more-on-functions-1000 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image119.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.2508552055993003in"}

We have a few more things to talk about in terms of functions before
we\'re done with this lesson. The next thing is, that functions in
JavaScript can be anonymous. One of the important things to understand
about the way functions work in JavaScript, is that, functions are
first-class citizens in JavaScript. Which means, you can assign a
function to a variable, the way you could assign a string to a variable
or a number to a variable. In fact, you can use a function wherever you
can use data in JavaScript, and it\'s one of the very powerful features
of JavaScript. If you\'ll recall, we talked earlier about the fact that
JavaScript has some features that are really best in class features, for
any programming language, and this is one of them. This is really a very
powerful feature of JavaScript. You can actually assign a function to a
variable, and that function doesn\'t have to have a name. It can be
nameless, it can be anonymous. There are times when this is very useful,
especially if you\'re making a function that\'s really only going to be
used once or in one context. Then, there\'s really not a reason to
create a named function, if you\'re not going to use that name over and
over and over again are in different places in your script. Function
expressions are useful for that. They\'re useful for other things as we
get into more sophisticated JavaScript. For right now, I just want you
to be aware of what they are. We won\'t be using them much for a while,
but eventually, you\'ll be using function expressions if you keep
working with JavaScript. Let\'s actually see what this looks like in our
code over here. I\'m going to come over to my editor here and I\'m going
to leave that, that\'s all fine. I\'m going to make a variable called
\"greeting\" and I\'m going to assign it a function. You\'ll see that
this function doesn\'t have a name, it\'s just an anonymous function,
and we could do whatever we want in here. I\'m going to just for right
now, just do console dot log\" hello from the function\". My slide has
something a little bit more sophisticated down there, but for right now,
this will just do for us, just to see what this does. Then, in order to
call this function again, remember we have to invoke the function, we
have to call it or run it. I run \"greeting\" as if it were a function,
which seems weird, but that\'s the way it works in JavaScript. Greeting
parentheses. We run that like a function. Now, if I come over to my
console over here and run this, I\'m getting \"hamburgers\" again, then
I\'m getting \"Hello from the function\". That function is actually
running. That\'s important to understand. Again, this is called a
function expression, and it\'s because functions are first-class
citizens in JavaScript that we\'re able to assign a function to a
variable just as if it were data. The next thing to understand about
functions in JavaScript, and I\'m not going to demonstrate this now, but
I just want to call your attention to it, because if you\'re looking on
stack overflow, if you\'re looking up scripts online and seeing other
kinds of things, you will see arrow functions. This is again part of ESX
or ES 2015. It brought this new syntax and we\'ll come to it, not in
this course, but in the third course, we\'ll actually start working with
arrow functions. I want to mention them now because you\'ll see them
around and when you look at them, you\'ll look at them and go, what\'s
this? We haven\'t done this in JavaScript yet. I just want you to be
aware that it\'s just a slightly different syntax for writing functions.
Here, I have a function that should look fairly familiar. I\'ve got a
greeting, \"Hello, and Good Morning\". Then I\'ve got function
\"capitalized\" and I\'m passing in a string, and then I take that
string and uppercase it, and then I return in a string. This function is
going to return the string upper cased. This should be fairly familiar
from doing this lesson. So far we\'ve seen this kind of thing and
that\'s not too different from what we\'ve seen. Whereas here, we\'re
using the function expression, I have a variable called \"Capitalized
Expression\". That has an anonymous function that takes a string and
then it takes that string and makes it uppercase and returns it. So this
variable will become the uppercase string that gets passed in when it\'s
run. That\'s the function expression that we saw just a few minutes ago.
Now, when we use the arrow functions, the arrow functions is a different
syntax for a function expression. In fact, sometimes they\'re officially
called arrow function expressions. We can make a variable capitalize
arrow in any string, and then instead of the word function, we can just
put in this equal sign and the greater than sign to make an arrow. We
can take anyString and uppercase and return that. This becomes one line,
which is one of the reasons why these arrow functions have become
popular, is they really do lead to shorter code and less syntax to have
to deal with. Although when you look at them, it can be a little bit
harder to understand exactly what\'s going on here. But all three of
these functions are actually doing the same thing. They will all return
the exact same data. That\'s an important thing to understand. Again,
we\'ll get to the arrow functions later in the third course, but for
right now, I just want you to be aware that they exist and that really
they\'re just a different syntax for writing functions. The last thing
that we need to talk about in terms of our lesson today on functions is
the difference between functions and methods in JavaScript. It can be a
little bit confusing because these two terms are basically
interchangeable in JavaScript, and you\'ve already heard me use the term
method sometimes and functions other times. It\'s helpful to know a
little bit about what the two terms mean and why they\'re
interchangeable. Essentially in JavaScript, when you have a function
that belongs to an object, it\'s called a method. For example, we have
the string object and there are functions that belong to string objects
like toUpperCase or toLowerCase, and when we have a function like that
that belongs to the string object, it\'s called the toUpperCase method,
because it belongs to the string object. Or another example, with arrays
we have the push method, which is a function that belongs to the array
object. So when we push something into array, we\'re using the push
method and we use the term method for that. Now, in reality in
JavaScript, everything is an object so in that sense, every function
belongs to an object of one sort or another. In fact, early on in this
lesson, we wrote a function called doStuff. But doStuff, since it
doesn\'t explicitly belong to some other object, it does belong to the
window, and you could actually write window.doStuff and that will
actually work. If we go back to our code here, and I come in here and I
uncomment out this thing and I put window.doStuff, you\'ll see if I save
that and come back and test it over here, it actually functions. Because
ultimately my doStuff function belongs to the window object. Now, if a
function belongs to the window object, we don\'t often do this.
Occasionally we do, but very rarely will we put window.doStuff in there,
we\'ll just call doStuff. In that case, we\'ll call it a function. But
when a function more explicitly is set to work with a particular object,
we\'re more likely to call it a method. So that\'s where the difference
in terminology comes from. But in reality, in JavaScript all functions
are methods. So the two terms really are interchangeable. If you hear
the term method and you\'re confused by that, just think, Oh yeah,
that\'s a function, and that\'s fine. Okay, great. We\'ve learned a lot
about functions in this lesson, and you\'ve already learned a lot of
JavaScript. Along with the challenges, you\'ll really get good at the
JavaScript syntax and you\'ll get good at being able to make simple
programs function. From here we get to start doing some much more
interesting things where we start working with content on web pages and
manipulating web pages. So this course only gets more fun from here. So
stick with it and keep working on the lessons, and I can\'t wait to see
you in the next one.

-   2.25.Additional Resources

-   2.25.More Shit

# Week Three:  {#week-three .unnumbered}

# 3.01 Module 3 Introduction {#module-3-introduction .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image120.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4572648731408573in"}

Welcome to the third module on JavaScript. In this module, we\'ll
be doing some really exciting stuff. We\'ll be digging in and learning
how to actually affect elements on web pages. When we do that, we\'ll
also be looking at events, will look at what happens when you want to
capture a click or a scroll or the submission of a form or something
like that. When we capture these events, we can then make different
things happen on web pages. This is where the real magic is in
JavaScript, and it\'s also the reason why JavaScript exists, is because
it\'s so tightly tied into the browser. Now we can find JavaScript
in other places other than the browser. But its main reason to exist is
the fact that it is so tightly connected into the browser, and we\'ll
really get into that, in this part of this course during this module. So
I hope you have fun with it, and by the end you\'ll have learned quite a
lot of JavaScript.

# 3.02 JavaScript and the DOM (4:34) {#javascript-and-the-dom-434 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image121.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4572648731408573in"}

JavaScript and the DOM. The DOM stands for Document Object Model.
JavaScript sees the web doc ument as an object, and it understands it
from the hierarchical perspective. The root object that JavaScript sees
is the window itself. The window, our browser window is the root object.
Then that has three sub-objects. The document, the location of that
document, and the history. We\'re really concerned with the document,
and the document breaks down into an HTML tag. We\'ve seen that
certainly on our documents and within the HTML tag there\'s a body tag.
Then we could have whatever HTML is making up the page. Here, I\'m
showing an article with a header and a paragraph and a footer, and that
matches the HTML that\'s in the image here on the left. If you look at
the markup on the left, you can see how that matches the article here,
in the diagram. JavaScript sees the article as an object that has
children. One child would be the header, and the header itself has a
child which would be the h1. Then another child of the article is a
paragraph. Another child of the article is the footer, which also has a
child which is a paragraph. We can see that represented in the diagram
over here. These elements on the page are nodes, and JavaScript
understands the relationships between the nodes. And we can use methods
and properties to do what\'s called traversing the document and getting
from one node to another so that we could affect it with JavaScript. For
example, if NodeA was that article, and it has three children, you could
say NodeA.firstChild is Node-A1, and NodeA.lastChild Is Node-A3. You can
look through the descriptions to the left here and understand the
relationships between these different elements. So Node-A1.parentNode,
for example, would be NodeA, or we can look at the children of NodeA as
an array, and we could say NodeA.childNodes\[0\] would be Node-A1. So on
and so forth, right down through this entire list. We can actually use
this relationship to work our way around HTML document using JavaScript
and be able to get elements and do things with them. Now, if you\'re
coming to JavaScript from another language like C++ or Java or Python or
something like that, this is a little weird. This is strange, but
really, when you think about it, JavaScript\'s tight integration in with
the browser and with what happens on our document is really
JavaScript\'s reason for being. Certainly we\'re seeing JavaScript now
outside the browser and in other places. But JavaScript\'s main reason
for being is the fact that it can do this stuff, and other scripting
languages can\'t, where other programming languages can\'t. In 2009,
when they decided that JavaScript was going to be the programming
language for the web, it was going to be native to the browser, that\'s
when this stuff really got solidified and everybody wanted to follow the
exact same specification, and even if they were doing slightly different
implementations of it, they were following the specification so that
this would work with JavaScript in whichever browser you\'re in. It\'s
taken a while to get to compatibility across browsers with JavaScript,
but we\'re pretty close to there these days.

# 3.03 Dot Syntax and Methods (5:21) {#dot-syntax-and-methods-521 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image122.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4572648731408573in"}

The dot syntax and methods. Notice we use dots or periods to separate
objects from their properties or their methods in JavaScript. On the
right here, you can see that we have a number of methods that are
related to being able to traverse the DOM or affect the DOM.
insertBefore(), we can create an element and insert it before another
element. We can replace a child. We could say, \"Take this child out of
here.\" Remove a child. Append a child. We can add a new paragraph to
the end of a div or something like that. Clone and node. We could take
an entire div with all its contents and clone it and add it to the page
somewhere else. We can create an element, we can create attributes, we
can create a text node. These are all methods that JavaScript has built
into it that will allow us to do things to the Document Object Model; to
the document itself and will affect the document there. One of the
document methods you\'ll use most frequently and is a good one to learn
first is getElementById. getElementById is a document method or a
function that belongs to the document object. Remember that\'s how we
define methods. What we can use with getElementById, is we can pass in a
particular ID, and then we can do things to that element, that will go
into our document, into our DOM or Document Object Model and find that
particular element and do something with it. We could set the style
property and the color sub-property to red, for example, for this
paragraph that has an ID of one. Remember, in HTML, when you have an ID,
it must be unique. It must be a unique ID on the page. This is something
I see as a mistake a lot of times with students learning to create
webpages. They\'ll use an ID and the page multiple times. But the whole
point of an ID is that it\'s unique, just like you have a student ID or
a driver\'s license ID or some other ID with a unique ID number on it.
The whole purpose of having an ID is that it is unique. Let\'s give this
a try. I\'m going to come over to my code editor here and you can see
I\'ve set up a page and I guarantee you it\'s a good idea for you to do
this as well. I strongly suggest it, but I\'m going to come in here and
I\'m going to add, I\'m going to say document if I could type
document.getElementById. You can see as I start typing, that it even
comes right up here and I can actually select it from the list to make
sure I get it right. Because you have to get the capitalization right.
It\'s CamelCased. The get is lowercase, but E is uppercase, B is
uppercase and I uppercase, but the d is lowercase. You have to get that
right, otherwise, it won\'t work. I\'m going to pass in one because
it\'s going to match this ID here, and I can set the style.color to red.
If I save that, and then I come back over here and you can see I have
this webpage loaded up here, and it\'s black here. But as soon as I
refresh the page, you\'ll see that it\'s turned red. Now, I don\'t have
any code in my HTML that\'s doing that. It\'s the script that\'s doing
that after the fact. It\'s really important to understand this. As I
come down here, notice paragraph ID1 and then style color red is added
here. But I didn\'t add that. That\'s not in the HTML that I added. Over
here, the HTML that I have, I have the ID1, but I don\'t have a style
attribute on here at all. When the page loaded, JavaScript loaded the
paragraph the way I wrote it, and then what the scripted is it went in
and found that element with the ID of one, and it added the style
attribute here and set its color property to red. JavaScript is doing
that on the fly after the page has been retrieved. Right now we\'re just
loading it from our desktop. But you could be getting it off of the
webserver, you\'d be getting it from anywhere. That page, when it gets
to the browser, it gets rendered by the browser and then the script runs
down at the bottom of the page and affects the page after that paragraph
has already been rendered. It happens so fast, you don\'t even really
see it. But this is a really great example of a document method,
getElementById, which is allowing us to go into our document, find that
ID, and then effect it on the page.

# 3.04 DOM: getElementsByTagName(); (7:56) {#dom-getelementsbytagname-756 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image123.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4572648731408573in"}

Here\'s another document method that allows us to get elements on the
page and do something with them. It\'s called getElementsByTagName, and
I have the S and elements highlighted because a common mistake is to
leave it off because it\'s getElementByID, but this is getElements, so
this is going to get more than one element, it\'s going to get a
collection of elements, and then we can do something with that
collection of elements. Let\'s give this a try. Here I have my page, I
have some paragraphs on the page, and I can write a script here,
document.getElementsByTagName. Again, the best thing to do is to go down
and make sure you select it from the list, that way you won\'t spell it
wrong, but it\'s getElements with a capital E and an S ByTagName, make
sure you get all the capitalization right there. Then I can actually
pass in, say, a P for paragraphs. What this is going to do is it\'s
going to go in and get all of these elements, and I can assign that to a
variable, var myParagraphs equals. Now, myParagraphs is going to hold a
collection of paragraphs, and if I console log that out, console.log(my
Paragraphs). If I console log that out, let\'s see what I get. I\'m
going to come back over here to my page and refresh, and we don\'t see
any difference here, but if I go to the console, you\'ll see I get an
HTMLCollection of three things; paragraph, paragraph, and paragraph, and
that\'s what\'s in here, and I could even fold this down and see what
the different paragraphs are, it gives me some information about them,
but it\'s giving me the collection of the paragraphs here. That\'s
important to understand about this particular method. Whereas
getElementByID gives me always just one thing. It\'ll always give me one
because IDs are unique. Whereas getElementsByTagName will give me an
HTMLCollection of elements that I need to then do something else with.
If I wanted to set the color of these paragraphs to red, then I would
need to use a loop because I can\'t apply the style color to a
collection of things all at once. I have to apply them to each item in
that collection. I need to use a loop to loop through each of the
elements in that collection, so I\'m going to use a for Loop here, and
let\'s go ahead and do this over here rather than console log this out.
I\'m going to use a shorter variable here. MyParagraphs is long, I\'m
guaranteed to type that wrong at some point, so I\'m just going to call
it ps, something like that. That\'s fine for paragraphs. I\'m going to
make a for Loop, and again, remember, if you\'ve been doing the
challenges and really getting used to the syntax, you should be able to
just write a for Loop. For var i equals 0 or i is less than ps.length; i
plus plus and then we\'ve got our curly braces, and in here I\'m going
to take each paragraph, so I\'m going to say ps \[i\].style.color equals
red. Now, if I just do this, you\'ll see it\'ll work. It\'ll actually go
through this entire Loop. The first time through the Loop, this thing
has three paragraphs and it\'s going to get paragraph 0. I set its style
color to red, and then I gets incremented from zero to one, one is less
than three, so it will get paragraph 1, which is this one here, and set
its color to red, I gets incremented again to two, two is less than
three, so it\'ll come in, I\'ll get paragraph 2, that\'s this one here,
and set its colored to red, and then I gets incremented to three, three
is no longer less than three, because remember ps.length, the length of
this is three, so three is no longer less than three and the script will
end. Let\'s give that a try.

Let\'s run that over here. If I refresh this, you can see all my
paragraphs generate. Now, the loop goes so fast, you can\'t even see it,
so let\'s do something to make it so we can really see that this is
actually Loop, so I think this is interesting. I\'m going to come in
here and I\'m going to add alert. I\'m going to use my backticks here
showing where I graph, and then don\'t forget since that\'s going to be
variable in dollar sign, curly brace, curly brace. Now, if I run this in
Chrome, I\'m going to get this alert three times; showing paragraph 0,
showing paragraph 1, showing paragraph 2, and then it turns the colors.
Even better is to show this in Firefox, so I\'m going to switch to
Firefox web browser over here. Firefox does things a little bit
differently, uses the Mozilla rendering engine, and so it renders things
a little bit differently. I\'m going to go ahead and open our page here
in Firefox, and there\'s my DOM HTML, and notice the difference here.
This one actually shows the first paragraph turns red, and then I get
the alert, and then we see the second paragraph turn red and I get the
alert, and then I get the third paragraph turning red, so you can
actually see the Loop actually running, and usually these Loops run so
fast, you don\'t even see them. But with the alert in there, you can
actually see that that loop is running and turning the paragraphs red
one at a time in the collection, and I think that\'s helpful in
understanding how JavaScript works with collections of elements.

# 3.05 DOM: getElementsByClassName(); (5:09) {#dom-getelementsbyclassname-509 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image124.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4572648731408573in"}

The next document method that we\'re going to look at is
getElementsByClassName. This method will do exactly what you think it
will do. It will allow us to go into our document, and get elements that
have a particular class name, and put them into an HTMLCollection. So
that\'s very useful as well. Let\'s give it a try real quick. Here, you
can see I\'ve added class equals special on my image over there it was
blue, but whatever class you want to put is fine. It doesn\'t really
matter as long as you set up a variable per myClass equals
document.getElementsByClassName, this one here. Again, make sure you get
all the capitalization right or it won\'t work. Then we\'re going to get
special. Make sure you spell it the same as it is there. I\'m likely to
spell that wrong. That will take all of these elements. In this case,
it\'s just two and stick them into a collection. Then the same as
before, we are going to need to use our loop to go through and change
these items. For var i equals 0, while i is less than myClass.length. I
could just put a two there, but it\'s better to use this just to make
sure that I get all of them no matter how many there are. I plus, plus,
and then I could do myClass\[i\]. First-time to the loop, that\'s going
to be zero. Second time to the loop, it\'s going to be a one, and then
it\'ll finish.style.color equals red and that should work just fine.
Let\'s go test it out. It turned those two classes red. Now, one more
point of interest while we\'re here. Even if I just had one element on
the page to add this class, I could give it an ID and use \[inaudible\].
But if I am going to use getElementsByClassName, even if there\'s only
one, it still is going to return a collection of elements and that
collection is only going to have one element in it and I still need to
use a loop or some other way of getting to the element inside that
collection, even though there\'s only one. You\'ll see the loop will
still work. It\'ll just run only one time. A little bit easier way of
doing this, I don\'t really need a loop here because I know that
there\'s only one element in this collection, so I know it\'s going to
be element zero. So I don\'t need a loop, I can just make this zero and
get rid of the loop, like so. Clean that up a little bit. Now, myClass
is getting elements by class name special and myClass zero, since I know
there\'s only one, it\'s going to be myClass zero. It\'s going to be
that one in the collection. I can access it through because it\'s
treated like an array there. It\'s not actually an array, it\'s a
collection of HTML elements, but I can treat it like an array to go and
get element zero out of there and you\'ll see that will work just as
well. But the important thing here to understand is that if you\'re
using getElementsByClassName or getElementsByTagName or anything else
that gives you a collection of elements, you have to go in and treat it
as if it\'s a collection because that\'s what it is, and not just as an
individual element. That\'s easy to forget, especially if you have only
one. You\'re like, \"Why can\'t I just change that one? Why can\'t I
just use my class style color red?\" Because there\'s only one element
with that class in there. But JavaScript is getting a collection of
elements even if the collection only has one element or even if it has
zero elements in it, it\'ll still be a collection of elements. So
that\'s an important thing to understand about getElementsByClassName
and getElementsByTagName.

# 3.06 DOM: querySelector(); (4:58) {#dom-queryselector-458 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image125.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4572648731408573in"}

The next document method that we\'re going to look at is querySelector.
Now, the history here is a little bit interesting. Because in 2009 as we
said before, ES5 became the de facto standard for scripting for the web.
But there was the rise of a have a library called jQuery that became
extremely popular and it remains very popular to this day. Less so now
than it was, but it\'s still a very popular library that made it
Ggetting elements in the DOM and doing things with them a lot easier.
And jQuery was very popular for that reason. And due to that popularity,
JavaScript had added to it in 2013, so before ES6. An API that allows us
to use querySelector and querySelectorAll which we\'ll also look at to
get elements from the DOM. And it\'s a little bit more convenient but it
works a little bit differently than the older get element by ID, get
element by tag name, get element by class name methods. So these are
newer methods, and they\'re very useful, but they work a little bit
differently. And because of the introduction of these methods, jQuery is
not nearly as necessary as it used to be. And what we\'ll still learn
jQuery, we\'ll be learning that in the second course in specialization.
But now we can actually get elements into our DOM a little bit easier
than we could just with the older methods. Okay, so let\'s take a look
at querySelector and the way that works. So over here I have a document,
and I have a div with an id on it, and then inside there I\'ve got a
paragraph for the class. Well, I could do something like this. var
myText = document.querySelector. Document.querySelector. And then what I
would pass in is actually instead of just some class, I would put either
dots or I could put .someclass. So what\'s different here is before we
didn\'t use the CSS syntax. Now we have to use the CSS syntax with
querySelector. Or I could even be more specific and I could say go find
#special.someclass. So get to someclass inside the id=\"special\". And
what\'s nice about this is that query selector will always return the
first element that it finds that matches what you pass in here. So even
if I had another paragraph with some class on it, this will always only
return one thing to my text. Let\'s put a semicolon there and see if
this works. myText.color, oops, style.color = \"red\". And if I go over
and test this document, and again I recommend, that you give this a try
yourself. You can see that it\'s trying that paragraph red. Now if I
were to go in here and add my class, someclass to another element on
here like this one here. You\'ll see it still only affect the first
paragraph if I go back and refresh this. Because it only gets the first
element that it matches, and that\'s very useful for when you want to go
in and get something like that. And again, remember with both
querySelector and querySelectorAll that you have to pass in. When you
pass stuff in, you\'re passing in the CSS syntax #special instead of
just special. Or .someclass, instead of just someclass, that\'s really
important with querySelector. Okay, great. Let\'s take a look at the
querySelectorAll method in the next video.

# 3.07 DOM: QuerySelectorAll(); (6:10) {#dom-queryselectorall-610 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image126.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4572648731408573in"}

The querySelectorAll method does what you would think it would do, is
that it allows you to grab a group of elements again, but this time
using the newer, more updated DOM API querySelectorAll. Let\'s go and
give that a try really quickly here. Over here, I\'ve got my div id
special and I\'ve got some paragraphs in here, and I can do something
like var myText equals document.querySelectorAll and with that
querySelectorAll. I could pass in here in quotes, I could pass in pounds
special p, and that\'s going to get me all of the paragraphs that are
inside this div special. So I can go into my document and find a
particular group of elements somewhere in my document. But again, with
this, we\'re going to need a for loop. For var i equals 0, where i is
less than myText. Length; i++. Then I can do myText square bracket
i.style.color equals red. Here we go. Save that and then we should be
able to test it over here and see, when I refresh the page, it is
turning all those paragraphs red. Just one more time to just drive this
home, noticing here when I go look in that div, it\'s added style color
red to each one of these paragraphs. That\'s what it\'s doing, it\'s
going into special and finding the paragraphs and affecting the DOM
after the page, after the HTML initially loaded. It\'s really important
to understand that. That\'s the way this works. So querySelectorAll will
allow us to get groups of elements and then we would loop through them
to affect them one at a time. So far we\'ve talked about five document
methods. Three of them are older, Document getElementById we still use
that quite a lot. Document getElementsByTagName and document
getElementsByClassName you might use this less often now because now we
have the newer methods, querySelector and querySelectorAll. But these
are just some of the document elements that allow us to add elements to
the page. Next, I want to talk about working with properties. We\'ve
already seen this a little bit. We\'ve seen element.style.color. So
we\'re going in and we\'re getting that element, whatever the element
is, we\'ve got that element, whether it\'s paragraphs or whether it\'s a
div; whatever it is, we\'re getting that element with our document
methods, we\'re getting those elements and then we can apply the style
property. We can get the style property and the color sub-property and
set it to whatever color name we want. There are other properties that
we can use. There are a number of them. Some of the more popular ones
are ones that we use more frequently are innerHTML. We\'ll be seeing
that one quite a bit and className is really useful so that you can
actually take an element and apply a class to it. This is super useful
in modern JavaScript because CSS has become so powerful. Now, we can put
animations in CSS, and then when we want to animate something, we can
use JavaScript to add that class in CSS that has the innovation and the
innovation will take place on the screen. That\'s a really great way to
create interactive for animated elements on a web page. So we have the
document methods, and now we have element properties that allow us to
work with the properties of certain elements. But there are also element
methods or element functions and those are also really useful. For
example, setAttribute, we can pass in an attribute name and then set its
value. Back here we could set the className by using the className
property. Here we could set the className by passing in class and then
passing in a value. I forgot to quote at the end there. But we can pass
in the value there or we could do something else; we could use on an
anchor tag, we could set the atria attribute and set its value. Or we
can remove an attribute or we could get an attribute and do things with
it. Notice that methods are distinguished by the fact that they have
parentheses. So when you\'re using a method or a function, it has
parentheses, whereas the properties don\'t have parentheses, they have
an equal sign and then the value. So that\'s how you can tell the
difference between a property and a method. Okay, great. Let\'s see what
else we can do with this. This may be a little bit confusing at the
moment, but I promise that as we practice this stuff, it\'ll start to
make more sense. But it does take a little bit of getting used to, all
of these methods in properties for working with our document to affect
our web pages.

# 3.08 innerHTML (4:56) {#innerhtml-456 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image127.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4572648731408573in"}

\[MUSIC\] Next, we\'ll take a look at one of

the element properties that we just talked about in the previous video
and

see how powerful it is. And that\'s innerHTML. And if you look at this
image here, you

can see I have a div with an id=\"special\", and I can use any of my
document

methods to go in and get that div. And then I could use innerHTML to

actually change the contents in that div. I can replace these contents

with something else entirely, completely new, completely different. And
that\'s something else

could have HTML in it. So let\'s see what that looks like. So, over
here, I have my div id=\"special\",

and I have these three paragraphs in here. But down here I could say,
var myDiv = document.getElementById, pick it from the list so you don\'t
spell it wrong, special. With this version,

we\'re not using the pound here. We\'re using the older getElementById.
We can switch that in a minute

just to see what that looks like. But then I can say, okay, I\'ve got
that element, mydiv.innerHTML =. This is an element property, so we use

the equal sign, and then inside quotes, I can create a completely new
piece

of content to stick in there. There we go. That\'s my \</p\> there.
Okay, great, so now when I run this,

you\'ll see over here, It\'s still red from before,

but that\'s okay. Those paragraphs are going to get removed

and replaced with the new paragraph. Look at that. And if I come down
here and look inspect

in my body, and look at div id=\"special\", there\'s only one paragraph

in here in my inspector. Whereas if I were to do View Page Source,

you\'d see three paragraphs in there. Because when the page loaded, it
had three

paragraphs, and then the script ran and it removed those three
paragraphs and

put this one in instead. And that\'s what JavaScript is doing. And I
can\'t express how powerful this is. Because frequently what we need to
do on

our web pages is take a bunch of content and replace it with some other
content. Now, here,

I\'m using getElementById(\'special\'), I could also do querySelector.
But if I use this one,

then I would pass in #special. You see the difference there? This is the
newer method, and it uses

the CSS syntax to get to that element. But this will work just the same.
If I go back and refresh this page, you\'ll

see it\'ll do exactly the same thing. It\'ll get my new paragraph and

put it in there. So you could use whichever

document method you want. Once you get that element, then you can use
your element

properties to affect the element here. Now, I\'m putting this all

inside of this div here, but I don\'t need to use the variable. I could
just do

document.getElementById(\'special\') and then put this, Here,

it just makes for a very long line. So it\'s kind of helpful, and
that\'ll work. It\'s kind of helpful to have the variable,

but you don\'t have to have it. I can just go,

document.querySelector(\'#special\').innerH- TML, and then set my
property right there. And that\'ll work just as well. There\'s my new
paragraph. So that\'s using the innerHTML. And again, I just cannot
overemphasize

how powerful innerHTML is. We could use this in lots and lots of

places to get elements on our page and then replace those elements

with completely new elements. And you can put more HTML in there. We
could put an entire document

of HTML inside this div. Not just one paragraph, but

you could put articles, you can do all kinds of stuff, images. All kinds
of things can go

in there using innerHTML.

# 3.09 className (6:13) {#classname-613 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image128.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4572648731408573in"}

The next element property that I want to show you, which is extremely
useful is the class name element property. So let\'s take a look at how
this one works. Here I have a div with some paragraphs in here, and I\'m
using my query selector to get the first paragraph. Because remember,
instead of returning a collection, query selector returns the first one
that it finds. So it\'s going to go in here and look for first
paragraph. And then I\'m going to take that first paragraph and I\'m
going to use the class name, element property to set the class to blue.
And up here I\'ve added style and I\'ve added a class blue here to my
document. So let\'s see how this works. I\'m going to go over to my page
over here and you can see I\'ve added up here, a rule here to set for
anything that has the class blue here. So let\'s come down here. I\'m
going to call this Var firstPara equals document.querySelector. And
remember, we have to use the CSS syntax. In this case, it\'s just a \"
p\" because it\'s just a tag selector, but I\'m going to go get that
first paragraph. Now I\'ve got three paragraphs, but remember
querrySelector just returns the first one. And then I\'m going to say,
okay, firstPara, Set the class name. And you can see here there\'s one
called classList. I\'m just showing you a few of the document, select
the document properties that are super useful, but there are plenty of
other ones that you can look up and work with as well. Class name equals
blue. So now when I run this, come back here, click on My document here.
I\'ve got my three paragraphs, but when I refresh the page, it turns the
first paragraph blue. And if I come down here and look at this, what is
it actually done there, but it\'s added class equals blue on to that
paragraph. Sure, I could have set the style color property to blue. But
adding the class blue is even more powerful, because even though in both
cases and just setting the color. I could have a lot more declarations
in this class up here, that would do all kinds of things that could be
adding an animation. I could be doing all kinds of really cool stuff,
and we\'ll get to do some of those things in this course. So, hold on to
your hat, because it\'s coming. But first I just want to introduce the
basic concepts to begin with. And this is a super useful one, using the
class name property to set a class that already exists on the page.
It\'s just really, really powerful. Back to our slides here, we\'ve
looked at a few of the element properties that we can set, the style
property with its sub properties for our different CSS features. We can
use that one, we can use the inner HTML property, that\'s extremely
powerful for replacing HTML inside of any element. And then there is the
class name property that allows us to put a class name on things. The
next thing I want to look at really quickly is some of the element
methods. Remember these are properties because they\'ve got the equal
sign and then a value, but we also have element methods. And the first
one we\'ll look at is setAttribute. So here I have a form and let\'s
just do this one really quickly here. I have a form and I\'m going to
say var myCheckbox equals document.get element or I can do a
querySelector. QuerySelector input. And then I\'ll get my first input
fields here. And then I could do okay, myCheckbox.setAttribute, and set
attribute takes two parameters. I\'m going to say what is the attribute
that I want to set? In this case it\'s checked, and I\'m going to set
the value which is also checked. Checked, checked, and that\'s the way.
What that will do is it\'ll come in here and it\'s going to set a
checked attribute and set it to checked, which will make the check box
checked by default. So if we go over and view the page, currently,
without having set that checkbox, you can see I\'ve got a checkbox here
but it\'s not checked. When I refresh the page, it comes up as checked
by default. And if I come down here and look at this, You can see
checked equals check that added that attribute into my HTML here. So set
attribute can be used for any number of attributes. You want to set an
image source on an element. You could use this you want to change the
HREF on a link. You could use this any attribute can be accessed with
set attribute. And you could set it to whatever value you want to set it
to. And that is another very powerful tool that allows us to change
content on our webpages.

# 3.10 Creating Elements and Text Nodes (5:04) {#creating-elements-and-text-nodes-504 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image129.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4572648731408573in"}

I have shown you a few of the document methods, the element methods and
the element properties in this lesson and there are lots more. There are
many more that you can use to do all kinds of interesting things to your
pages. But I think it\'s helpful to see just a few to begin with, to see
how those work and to experiment with those in a limited way and then
add more features and methods and all that stuff as you go along. I do
want to show you just a few more in this lesson just because I think
it\'s helpful to just see that there are different ways of doing things
in JavaScript. This one I want to show you is a way of creating elements
and text nodes in JavaScript and then adding them to the page. It\'s an
interesting process. Again, we\'ve used innnerHTML and we can use that
to also change content on the page, but this is just a different way of
doing it. Here, let\'s actually switch over to the code editor so that
we can actually do this. Here I\'m going to make a variable var myTag
and I\'m going to say document.createElement. What am I going to create?
I\'m going to create a paragraph. This makes a new paragraph and puts it
into myTag. Create element is a document property that makes a new
element. Then I\'m going to make a new text node, var myText equals
document.createTextNode, here\'s a new paragraph. I\'m going to make the
text node. JavaScript creates a text node, we create the paragraph, we
create the text node and then we\'re going to say myTag.appendChild,
myText. That takes the paragraph that we just created, the text node,
this text and sticks it into the paragraph tag that we created. All of
this is just happening in memory in JavaScript. Then we have to actually
put it on the page. I\'m going to get my div here, var myDiv equals
document.querySelector div. That\'s going to go find the first div on
the page. Then I can say myDiv.appendChild, myTag. We\'re doing a
multi-step process here, where we\'re creating a paragraph, we\'re
creating some text, putting the text in the paragraph and then going and
getting our div and appending it to the end of the paragraph here.
Let\'s see if I did this right. If I come back and do this over here and
refresh, you can see that my first paragraph is here and a new paragraph
has been appended inside the div. It\'s been added to the div here and
JavaScript is doing that through this process. Could I have just

used innerHTML and added and changed the contents of this div so that it
had these two paragraphs? Sure, I could have done it that way. But
sometimes it\'s useful, this seems like a convoluted, complicated way,
but sometimes it\'s useful to actually create the elements using the
document method, create element, to create content, to stick in those
elements, and then to append them to the page in particular places.
Sometimes it\'s useful, and sometimes a better way to go than using
innerHTML in certain circumstances.

# 3.11 Removing Elements (3:18) {#removing-elements-318 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image130.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4572648731408573in"}

One last method that I want to show you in this lesson is how to remove
an element from another element. Again, we could use innerHTML and just
replace all the contents all at once, but sometimes removing elements is
useful. Let\'s take a look at this example really quickly. Here I have a
div with two paragraphs in it, and I\'m going to go ahead and get that
div and put it into a variable, var myDiv, and assign a
document.querySelector(\'div\'). So that\'ll go get the first div on the
page, which there\'s only one, so that\'s nice and easy. Then I could do
myDiv.removeChild, that method. Which child am I going to remove? Well,
I\'m going to say myDiv.children\[1\]. What that\'s going to do is it\'s
going to go into myDiv, look at its children, and find child number 1.
Remember, this is child number 0 here. That\'s zero, this is one. That
will actually go and remove this second paragraph from this div. Put a
semicolon there, save that, and then let\'s go over to our browser here.
You could see I\'ve got the two paragraphs there, when I refresh the
page, that second one is gone. Down here you\'ll see it\'s not in here
anymore. It\'s been taken out. JavaScript removed it. Removing elements
using the remove child method is a really useful tool for removing
elements from the page, if you need to do that. Here we\'ve seen a lot
of different methods that we can use on our webpages to do all kinds of
things. We\'ve talked about some of the document methods, some of the
element methods, and some of the element properties that we can use to
go in and affect content on our page. Remember, JavaScript sees the page
as this tree of objects, starting with the window, and building down
from there. We can traverse that document and find elements on there,
and then affect them using these different methods and properties, and
that\'s how we\'re going to create all kinds of interactive elements in
our webpages.

### 3.11.JavaScript-and-the-DOM.html

<https://www.coursera.org/learn/javascript-basics/supplement/DCOHD/additional-resource>

<https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document_Object_Model/Introduction>

### 3.11.JavaScript-DOM-Challenges.pdf

### https://www.coursera.org/learn/javascript-basics/supplement/Jjf7e/javascript-dom-challenges-17-21 {#httpswww.coursera.orglearnjavascript-basicssupplementjjf7ejavascript-dom-challenges-17-21 .unnumbered}

# 3.12 Capturing Events with JavaScript (5:16) {#capturing-events-with-javascript-516 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image131.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4572648731408573in"}

Capturing Events with JavaScript. Events happen. Users will click on
something, they\'ll scroll the page, they\'ll submit a form. Events
happen on webpages. And when events happen, JavaScript can capture them
and then they can do something with those events. When we combine this
with manipulating the document, like we saw in the previous lesson, this
is where a lot of the power of JavaScript really happens. Once we\'ve
talked about how to capture events and handle them, you have all of the
basic pieces of the puzzle to make interactive webpages. Because we can
use our logic float structures, sequence, selection, loop, along with
our document methods and our element methods and properties to change
elements on the page when events happen. And that\'s how we can get
interactive webpages. Let\'s take a look at this very basic example.
Here I have a webpage with a button on it. And when you click the
button, it\'s going to pop up an alert saying that you clicked the
button, something that shows that you actually clicked the button. So
let\'s go over and do this and try this out. Here you can see I have a
webpage, I have a button on the webpage, it says Don\'t Press Me. And
I\'m going to grab that button using my document element methods. So
I\'m going to make a variable var btn, and I\'m going to assign it
document.querySelector, Button. And that\'ll get that button. There\'s
only one button on the page, so it\'s easy to get that one button. And
it\'s going to assign it to button, to btn there. And then I\'m going to
make a function. Remember, we talked bout functions. I\'m going to make
a function called ouch, And all that function\'s going to do is do an
alert, I told you not to press me. You can put whatever you want in
there, that\'s fine. And then I\'m going to say, okay, btn.onclick run
this function ouch. So that\'s going to actually run the function using
on the button. And we\'re using here a special property that will
capture the click event. So let\'s do that really quickly, let\'s see if
this works. If I come over here and refresh the page, if I click Don\'t
Press Me, I get an alert that says I told you not to press me. So I\'m
capturing that event of the clicking of the button. And the way I\'m
capturing that event is with the onclick property. One thing to notice
is that I define this function, and when I assign the function to that
property, notice I didn\'t put the parentheses at the end here. If I
did, then that function would run right away, it would run immediately.
So if I put parentheses here, you\'ll notice that it\'s not going to
wait for me to click. Instead, it\'s going to run right away. So if I
come over here and refresh this page, you\'ll see I get the alert
without even clicking the button. So when I use the event property with
the function that I\'ve created this way, I do not add the parentheses
for the function there. I just reference that function by name, ouch.
And it will then run that function when the event runs. Now, you don\'t
have to define a function here. We can actually just use an anonymous
function here. So I could say function, parentheses, curly braces, and
just stick the alert in here, And get rid of this altogether. And
frequently, when you\'re using something like this, you\'re only going
to run this on this particular button in this circumstance. So there\'s
not really a reason to create a named function that you could use over
and over again in this case if you\'re only going to run this in this
one case here. But let\'s see if this works. Refresh, Don\'t Press Me,
and I\'m getting the alert. So I can use the anonymous function to do
that.

# 3.13 Event Listeners (5:09) {#event-listeners-509 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image132.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4572648731408573in"}

The unclick event property is useful, but a more frequent method that
you\'ll see of capturing event is using the addEventListener method.
This is a great way of capturing events because you can capture all
kinds of events with addEventListener method. You can even tell it what
type of event you want it to capture. And what\'s really great about it
is you can actually put multiple event listeners on one element whereas
with the event property, you can only put one. You can only be listening
for one thing at a time. So here, I\'m going to go back to our version
with the function ouch. In the alert in there, and then we\'ll use the
addEventListener instead. So let\'s give that a try really quickly over
here. So instead of using the onclick event for button btn, instead of
onclick that event property, I\'m going to use the addEventListener,
method. And notice the difference between the two. The onclick property
is a property because it\'s onclick and then an equal sign in what
you\'re assigning to it. With addEventListener. It\'s a method because.
Because it\'s got parentheses, we\'re going to pass in a click. That\'s
the event we\'re really listening for. And then we\'re going to pass in
the function that we\'re going to run. When that event happens. And this
is a very much more modern way of doing things is using the
addEventListener method here. So let\'s see if that works. And sure
enough, it works just the same as before. The most common syntax is to
use the addEventListener with an anonymous function. So it kind of
combines the two that we looked at before. So let\'s take a look at that
instead. So down here, instead of running the function here, ouch.
We\'re going to put in an anonymous function, with its parentheses and
curly braces. And this function is going to run, when the click happens.
And in here inside the curly braces is what it\'s going to do. So we\'re
going to put in there, the alert. Stick that in there. And then we
don\'t need this function at all. So you can see that we\'re running,
this function starts here and ends over there. We\'re going to run that
function that anonymous function. Again, we use an anonymous function
because unless you\'re going to be running this alert on lots of
buttons, in which case then it does make sense to pull it out and turn
it into a separate function. But unless you\'re going to do that,
you\'re probably only going to use it within the context of this
particular button. And in that case, an anonymous function is more
appropriate. So we can save that. I\'m going to come back and let\'s
just test it one more time refresh the page. Don\'t press me and I get
my alert. So works great. Now, this syntax this line is getting kind of
long here. Usually you would break it after the curly brace, and then
this curly brace can come down here. Notice when I type this. One last
thing I want to show you before we go, I\'m going to do it again. Notice
when I type it, I type it from the outside in. So I typed my function
with the parentheses in the curly braces, and then I come in here. And I
add my alert, or whatever I want to have happen inside this function
here. Because with this, with doing this, you\'re going to end up with a
bunch of extra, punctuation here and it\'s really easy to get confused.
And if you lose a curly brace or parentheses, or semi colon or something
else, it\'s really hard to those. Those problems are some of the harder
ones to track down and you\'ll have fewer problems you\'ll be less
frustrated. If you do it this way, where you always type from the
outside in so when I add a function, I type its parentheses and curly
braces, and then go inside and put in what I want to put in here, okay?
So that will really help you with making sure that your syntax is clean.
And then it\'s, in that it\'s going to have fewer errors.

# 3.14 The Event Object (5:27) {#the-event-object-527 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image133.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4572648731408573in"}

The next thing to look at is the event object. The event object can be
passed into the function that runs when an event listener happens, and
it\'s a very useful object to have access to. Let\'s take a look and see
what it does. Over here, I\'m in my event listener here, and I have this
function here, and I could still do my alert here. I told you not to
press me or wherever I want to put in there. But we can pass in the
event object. Sometimes it comes in looking like this. This is just a
variable that represents this event object, and I can pass that in and I
can do event.target. The event.target will say what is the thing that
triggered this event? Event.target.style.backgroundcolor equals red,
something like that. Let\'s see what this does. If I come over and run
this, refresh my page, don\'t press me. It does that and sets the
background of the button to red, which is very interesting there.
What\'s going on here is we can use the event object and the event
target to actually know which element was triggering this event, and
then we can do something with that event.target. This is often very
useful. Now, this thing is just a variable. Sometimes you will see this
if you look around on Stack Overflow, you\'ll see people pass it in as
EVT. In which case, this would be EVT, or sometimes you\'ll see just E.
That\'s fine, it\'s nice and short. You could call it whatever you want,
it represents, call it chickens if you want to. It doesn\'t make sense
to call it chickens. Chickens target style doesn\'t really make any
sense so usually event makes sense or EVT or E, but you\'ll see it
represented in different ways if you look around on the web. If you look
at Stack Overflow, you\'ll see people putting in different values for
that event. But the thing that we\'re passing in here is the event
object, just to be really clear about that. One of the ways the event
object is used most frequently is to prevent default behavior. This is
especially true when we\'re working with forms and with the submission
of forms, we want to prevent the default submission of the form so that
we can do something with that form data before it\'s submitted, and so
we\'ll use that frequently. But let\'s just take a look at a really
simple example of this here. If I go over to my code editor over here, I
have just a link to Google here. Just a normal anchor tag with an HREF
going to Google. Down here, I have variable link document querySelector
a is going to go into my document, find the first anchor tag, it would
find, which is the only one on the page, and then I\'ve got attached to
that link.addEventListener when you click passing the event. We\'ll use
the event object in combination with event.preventDefault. The prevent
default method to keep that default action from happening. In this case,
we won\'t go to Google so I could do alert. Sorry, no Google for you.
Something like that or whatever you like. Now, if I test this page and I
come over to my events page and refresh here, I now have a link to
Google. When I click it, I get, \"Sorry, no Google for you,\" and the
page does not go to Google. But it\'s really the event.preventDefault
that\'s keeping it from going into Google. If I were to come back and
comment this line out here, you\'ll see what we get over here. If a
refresh, I get the sorry, no Google for you, but then it\'ll actually go
to Google because the event.preventDefault is needed in order to keep
that default event from happening. This is a particularly useful
function that we can use with the event object is prevent default, and
we\'ll be using that frequently in a number of our projects.

# 3.15 More on Events (7:54) {#more-on-events-754 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image134.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4572648731408573in"}

There\'s a lot more on events. And if you want another take on the
basics, you can go to this MDN web docs page on introduction to events.
I\'ll put the link in with the lesson. So you can click it and look
through this page. This page gives you a very thorough overview of
events in the way they work in JavaScript. And some of the more advanced
things that they get into like bubbling and propagation, all this kind
of stuff we\'ll look at later in the course. But this will give you a
thorough introduction to events in JavaScript here as well. What we\'re
going to do next is actually capture some different types of events, and
see what we can do with them in JavaScript. So, the first one we\'ll
look at is the submission of a form. So, let\'s take a look at this
example really quickly in the code over here, and I recommend that you
actually type these out, and save them, because they\'re going to be
really helpful to come back to. When you do, the event challenges coming
up, for some of our other projects, it\'ll be helpful for you to have
these little small scripts to reference to see how to do things later.
So I recommend typing them out. So here I am over here I\'ve got a form
on my page here, and it\'s set to method get. We\'ll see why in a few
minutes here. And down here, I\'m going to just get my form and stick it
into a variable bar. My form documents, I\'m going to use my document
query selector method to get the form. There\'s only one on the page so
I don\'t have to do anything special there. If I add multiple forms, I
could give it an ID. And then I could get it by the ID and that would be
fine too. But since I only have one that\'s kind of nice and easy, and
that\'s great, that gets me my form. And then I\'m going to put an event
listener on that form. My form dot add event listener. And the event
that I\'m going to look for this time is the submission of the form.
Submit tickets. Before we looked for click and often we want to capture
clicking of things, but in this case, we want to capture the submission
of the form. So I\'m going to look for a submit and then I\'m going to
run a function when the form is submitted, Put an extra space here to
make it really clear that these things are in here, okay? So we\'re
looking for a submit and then, we\'re going to run a function, put a
semicolon there, and then, what I\'m going to do is, going to go inside
the function here. Now the very first thing I\'m going to do is, I want
to stop the normal submitting of the form. I want to do something other
than that. So I\'m going to pass in my event object here. In this case,
I\'m just going to use e as a shortcut. And then down here I can do E
dot prevent default. Now this could be event or EBT. Sometimes E is
confused with error. So maybe being a little bit more explicit is
better, but, but this will still this should still work just fine okay?
So I\'m going to prevent the default, submission of the form. Great, so
we got that working. Next, I\'m going to actually get the value that
somebody types in this field up here, and I\'m just going to alert it
back to them. It\'s not very exciting, but it gives me kind of an idea
of something I can do. So I\'m going to do var form data. Equals
document dot query selector. And I\'m going to just do input in this
case, because this will actually go and find the first input. It\'s
going to find this input here. And really what I want is the dot value.
Okay, so I want to get that property the value property of this input
here. Now if you\'re not familiar with HTML or not, very familiar with
that. I can add a value here value equals bill and that will come up by
default, but if. Somebody types a value into the field, then that
default value would be replaced with whatever they type into the field.
So I\'m getting that value property since I\'m not adding the property
there explicitly, it\'ll be Whatever somebody types into the field,
okay, so then I can just alert out alert form data and now if we go try
this. I need to open my file again. That\'s open. Here it is. And if I
type something in here, no and submit. You\'ll see it says bill, and the
form data is not processed but the the prevent default, has kept this
from happening. So if I comment this out for a second Watch what happens
here. Refresh this. If I take no again and now if I click submit you\'ll
notice. Does that but then it actually processes the form. And I can see
that up here because I use the get variable. I use the get method, it\'s
actually putting the value that I typed into that field up in the URL,
by default, a form a form element when you submit it. The default
behavior is that it will go to whatever you set the action here. If I
had an action equals processor dot PHP, some other file that\'s going to
process the data, it would go to that page where we tried to, in this
case, it won\'t be able to because that page doesn\'t exist. If I do,
submit, it\'s going to do that. And then it\'s going to go look for
processor dot PHP, but that page doesn\'t exist. So it either tries to
go there or it just refreshes if I don\'t put an action attribute up
here, it will just refresh this page. And often I don\'t want to refresh
the page. I want to use JavaScript to capture this data and do something
with it. So that\'s why I\'m doing prevent default down here, and I
passing in this event, and he again, it\'s a little bit Unclear maybe
use evt instead, if you want to keep it short. And that will pass in
that event object and prevent the default behavior so that we can do
what we want to do with JavaScript in here. It\'s very useful very
useful.

# 3.16 Mouseover, Mouseover Events: HTML (7:32) {#mouseover-mouseover-events-html-732 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image135.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4572648731408573in"}

You know how to work with the click event, and now you know how to work
with the submit event. Now we can work with, have some fun with
mouseover and mouseout events in HTML and JavaScript. This is the HTML
here, so create a page with this HTML in here. All I have is h_1 that
says, roll your mouse over the boxes and a div here. We can roll our
mouse over these two elements. What we\'re going to do here, I\'ll give
you a second, you can pause this video and add this into a file. Make
sure you add the style with the div, and set the width and height to 50
pixels and the background color to red, so we can apply the style and do
some fun stuff with mouseover and mouseout. Now, let\'s take a look at
the script we can actually write to do this here. So let\'s go ahead and
do this over here. To begin with, I\'m going to make some variables for
my heading and for the box to get those two elements. Let\'s start with
that. Down here in my script, var heading equals document.querySelector,
h_1, and var div or my div equals document.querySelector div. That will
get those two elements there. I also want to change this text to, \"roll
your mouse over the box.\" Let\'s do that. Then let\'s just go see with
this page is looking like. If I come over here and refresh this, I have
a box and I have directions to roll my mouse over the box. Now, I\'m
going to put an event listener on the box that when I roll my mouse over
the box, it\'s going to change the inner HTML of this div right here.
We\'re going to add this here, box out event listener. When we mouse
over the box, we\'re going to change the inner HTML for the heading, the
mouse is over the box, so let\'s do that one, box.addEventListener. I
guess I should call this box to make this match my slot,
addEventListener. We\'re looking for a mouseover event. Then when that
happens, we\'re going to run a function like so. We\'ll put the cursor
in here and then we\'re going to say, okay. When we roll over that box,
we\'re going to go get the heading and change its inner HTML. Remember
that\'s a property so we use the equal sign and we\'re going to change
it to something like the mouse is over the box. Let\'s see if that
works. Let\'s test that. We come back to my page over here, refresh,
when I roll over the box, the mouse is over the box. Great, so that
works, but now it\'s stuck there. It changed that content. So now I want
to do something where when I mouse out of the box, I\'m going to change
the heading to, the mouse has left the box. So it\'s another, I\'m
adding two event listeners to box. Both mouseover and mouseout. This is
part of the power of using the add event listener method is that we can
be listening for multiple events on one object, which is really handy,
so let\'s do that. When I come back here and rather than type this off
from scratch, I\'m just going to copy, paste, change this to mouseout,
the mouse has left the box. Cool, that\'s great. Let\'s go give that a
try. Roll your mouse over the box. So the mouse is over the box. When I
leave the box, the mouse has left the box. Mouse is over the box, mouse
has left the box, so I can go back and forth. But it\'d be nice if I
could return the page to its default state without having to click the
refresh button. So I\'m going to add one more event listener for the
header. So when I roll over the header, it puts the original texts back
in there, like this. Roll your mouse over the box and box is there, but
really there\'s one box. Yeah, so let\'s just fix that right here. I\'m
just going to copy this and paste it. But I\'m no longer working with
box. I\'m going to put it on heading, addEventListener mouseover and
I\'m going to put the same texts that I have here and here to the
heading, to put it back to its default state of where it was before.
Skip that one last try see if it all working right. Whoops. Refresh the
wrong page there. But now I can roll over them up, box roll off it and
the event listeners are working. If I roll over the header, it puts it
back to its original state. This is a really great example of how we can
use event listeners and mouseover and mouseout to change content on the
page. Plus you\'re making use of the inner HTML property. That element
property that\'s taking that element and actually replacing the HTML
inside of it with something else, which is really very powerful and fun.
Now you\'re starting to see we can actually do some interesting things
to web-pages when we\'re no longer just putting stuff in the console.

# 3.17 Scroll Events: HTML (7:41) {#scroll-events-html-741 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image136.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4572648731408573in"}

The next event type that we can look at capturing our scroll events. So
change the HTML on the page that we just had to something like this,
I\'ve just changed the height to 5000 pixels for this div that\'s on the
page. So I\'ve got capturing scroll events and just an empty div that\'s
set to 5000 pixels high and I\'ve set it to 5000 pixels high so we have
something to scroll. Otherwise there\'s nothing to really scroll and we
can\'t really capture that event, okay, great. So once you\'ve got that
in place, you can pause this and go ahead and put that in there, so
you\'ve got that HTML in place in that CSS in place. Once you\'ve done
that, we can go ahead and take a look at the script for capturing scroll
events. And here we go, so I\'ve got a script here and it\'s really
pretty simple. It\'s pretty simple script, but we\'re going to capture
the scroll event and see what we can do with it, so let\'s try this out.
Over here on my script, the first thing I\'m going to do is create a
variable called pagetop and this variable is undefined at this moment.
I\'ve created a variable pagetop and then I\'m going to create an
EventListener and the EventListener in this case is going to go on the
window object. So I can actually do window.addEventListener, so I can
listen for events for the window, and I can listen for scroll. Scroll a
bit and then I\'m going to run a function when the scroll event happens.
Okay, so we\'ve got a function that\'s going to run here and what I want
to do here is I want to take pagetop and update its value it started out
as no value at all. But update the value of pagetop pagetop is going to
be equal to window.pageYoffset. So we\'re going to set it to that and
then I\'m just going to console log out pagetop. For now, just so we can
kind of see what\'s going on as we\'re scrolling the page. So a couple
of things you might be wondering one is, why am I defining the variable
here? I could just put var there but let\'s stick with this for the
moment and then I\'ll come back and answer that question once we see
what this does. I\'m going to go over to My browser over here and
here\'s my page, I\'m going to refresh that and here\'s my div that\'s
5000 pixels tall. I have my inspector open in the console selected over
here so I can actually see, as I scroll my page it\'s capturing that,
thing here, but it\'s not working right? I can see that the script is
firing, but my zeros not changing here,

what do they do is a mistake. Let\'s go take a look at my code, this is
a really great example of something I did wrong here and this happens
all the time

this will happen to you don\'t feel bad. I\'m kind of glad this kind of
thing happens here, notice I set pageXoffset, that\'s going to keep
track of whether

the page is moving horizontally or moving left and right horizontally.
Page Y offset was the one that I wanted and you may have caught that, as
I was saying earlier that I typed in the wrong thing there. But I\'m
going to change that to page y offset here and now let\'s go see if that
works properly. Come back here, refresh my page and you\'ll notice as I
scroll, it\'s telling me how many pixels down I\'ve scrolled. I can
scroll down or I could scroll up and you\'ll notice as I scroll up the
numbers will get smaller because the pageYoffset is telling me how far
from the top of the page Am I down the page here. And I should be able
to go down to 5000 because I made by element 5000 pixels not quite 5000
tall there but you get the idea. Now, one thing to note here is that
this EventListener is firing very, very often a couple things to note,
it\'s firing very, very often, it\'s firing every time I scroll just a
little bit. This event listener is going 123 boom, every single time I
scroll just a little bit, it\'s firing that EventListener. So that makes
the scroll EventListener very expensive in terms of processing and the
kinds of things that JavaScript is doing. So you need to be very careful
with the window add event listener scroll event because it\'s going to
fire frequently. That brings me back to this, I could have just put var
page top here. Instead of defining it here, but every time I scroll just
a tiny little bit, it\'s going to ask JavaScript to recreate the page
top variable from scratch. And then assign a value to it whereas if I do
it up here, it\'s a little bit less expensive, because now I\'m just
updating the value of pagetop. I create the variable once and then
update

the variable as I scroll down the page, it\'s not a big difference,
you\'re not going to notice a huge difference in this example. But it\'s
kind of important to mention because when we talk about creating events
that are about scrolling the page, we need to be really careful about
what we\'re asking JavaScript to do. Because you can get your page can
get bogged down really quickly keeping track of all the scroll events
that are happening. And there are some techniques you can use to, to
sort of mitigate the effects of that and we\'ll look at some of those
later in this course. Okay, but for right now all I want you to be
really aware of is that we can actually capture the scrolling the
window. In this way that\'s very effective here and scroll back up to
the top and refresh Scroll down, you\'ll see it\'s capturing this
numbers, so this is actually a really effective way of doing it. One
last thing I want to mention while we\'re here about the scroll event is
notice it doesn\'t capture every single pixel. If I scroll slowly
enough, capture a lot of them but you can see I\'ve missed a few of them
in there. If I scroll really fast, it will skip lots of them more
frequently, so that\'s another thing to pay attention to. If you\'re
looking for a very specific pixel, it\'s harder to get with the scroll
event.

# 3.18 Window Resizing (4:23) {#window-resizing-423 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image137.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4572648731408573in"}

Another simple example that we can look at is watching for a resize of
the window, and this is useful in responsive design. So let\'s take a
look at this one really quickly as well. I have an h1 here, Resize the
window. I don\'t need my div anymore. I\'d get rid of that and I can
also get rid of my style tag up here, get rid of the whole style tag. We
don\'t really need that anymore either. But down here, I can actually do
another window.addEventListener. But in this case, the event we\'re
going to look for is a resize. I\'m looking for resize the window, and
then we\'ll run a function And then, I\'m just going to add two console
log statements in here. So I can watch for resizing both the width and
the height of the window. So I\'m going to do console.log, parentheses
and \[INAUDIBLE\] use my tickmarks and put in here The window, width is,
I think it\'s window.innerWidth. Is that right? Let me check my slide
over here. Window.innerWidth, yes, and window.innerHeight,
window.innerWidth, and that\'s a variable so I\'m going to put a dollar
sign and a curly brace. And at the end, I put a curly brace. And then I
will just copy this console.log here \[INAUDIBLE\] type it all again and
paste it in here, window dot window height, Is window.innerHeight.
InnerWidth and innerHeight are properties that belong to the window. So
we can actually get a number of pixels for the window with this and that
will actually work pretty nicely. So those are a couple more properties
to add to your list of things, list of properties that you know about.
So I can come over here and go to my Events page. I\'m going to refresh
this. And if I actually pull this off of here and let me see if I can
position it just right here, there we go. And then I\'m going to resize
this window. And as I do that, you can see that I\'m getting some
comments over here about how wide and how \[INAUDIBLE\], window height
is undefined. Well, I did something wrong with my window inner height.
Let\'s go see what I did wrong over there. window.innerHeight, capital
H, there we go. That happens to the best of us. And now, let\'s try it
again. Right, so now I\'m getting, the width is changing because I\'m
changing the width here. And then if I come down here and change the
height, you can see the height is changing. So there we go, we have a
tool that we can use to find out how wide our window is and how tall our
window is. And this is extremely useful in JavaScript. And the resize
event can be very useful too if you\'re doing something with responsive
design.

# 3.19 Key Down Event (6:43) {#key-down-event-643 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image138.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4572648731408573in"}

The next type of event that we\'re going capture is when you\'ve pressed
a key on your keyboard. That\'s interesting that we can capture that.
Imagine creating games that you could play where you\'re pressing keys
on your keyboard and things happen in the browser or something like
that. That would be fun. Over here on your HTML page, we can just add a
script. This time we\'re going to actually attach the EventListener to
the document itself. Let\'s just do that. It\'s a really simple thing to
do. Let\'s come over here. I\'ve got a Keydown Event, press a key and
I\'m going to actually say document.addEventListener. In here, I\'m
going to look for a key down event. You could also look for key up or
some other types of events that have to do with keys as well. Function.
Then I\'m just going to alert, A key was pressed. Let\'s go over and
give that a try over here. I refresh this page and press key. I get a
key was pressed. That\'s cool. That\'s working great. I can detect when
a key was pressed. Now, we can check to see that a key was pressed but
it would be nice to know which key was pressed. We can find that out
through using the which property on our event. Let\'s give that a try
real quick. I\'m going to pass in here my event object. Then in here,
instead of using my quotes, I\'m going to use the tick marks and say the
event.which key was pressed. An event.which is a variable so I\'m going
to put a dollar sign then a curly brace and then a curly brace. Let\'s
give that a try. Now, when I press the J key, I get the 74 key was
pressed. I\'m getting a code that goes with each key. I press the L key
I get 76. If I press an A key, I get a 65. I can do this kind of thing
to find this stuff out. Now, what\'s interesting here is that the which
property has been deprecated. I just found out about this recently. More
recently than I put together this lesson. This is something that happens
with JavaScript and with web stuff, in particular, is that things
change. Part of learning about the web is getting comfortable with
finding out when things change and what to do about it. From my
understanding, the which property was deprecated because, keyboard
layouts can change a lot all over the world. They decided that that was
not the good way to go. If you come over here to this MDM page, you can
actually find out a lot about the different events and down here, it\'ll
actually say the keyboard which key has been deprecated. Now the reality
is, is that browsers will support it for a long, long time to come. You
could certainly use it, but they\'re saying you shouldn\'t use that, you
should use event keyboard key instead. Let\'s give that a try real
quick. Back here on my page, and I\'m going to change which to key.
Because that\'s what the MDN says I should do and they\'re the most
authoritative resource on this stuff. Let\'s go over and check that out
over here. If I refresh my page, if I press the F key, now I\'m not only
getting not a number, but I\'m actually getting the F key was pressed.
If I press a y, I get the y key is pressed. That\'s interesting and
useful. We\'ve captured a lot of different types of events now, from the
click event to the submission of a form, to the mouse over and mouse out
and scrolling and capturing keys. There are all types of events, these
are just a few examples. There are plenty more events that you can
capture and you can look up the full list on the Mozilla Developer
Network, if you wanted to start really poke through them all. But these
will keep you busy for quite awhile. Just these few events. By capturing
these events and combining that with manipulating the page, we can do
some really interesting things in our webpages now. You really have a
lot of the basics that you need as a foundation to start building
interesting, interactive web pages. We\'ll be going on from here and
we\'ll be talking about a few more basic concepts and techniques. Then
we\'ll be practicing a lot of this stuff and building some projects so
you can actually try it out. Plus there\'s lots of challenges along the
way, challenge exercises and challenges within the projects for building
stuff. Hopefully, you\'ll find it fun and are willing to come along with
me on this journey and continue to put what you\'ve learned with
JavaScript to use in actually making some interesting fun things.

### 3.19.Additional Resources

Here are resources related to these lessons:

-   [Introduction to Events in
    JS](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Building_blocks/Events)

-   [Event
    Reference](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Events)

### 3.19.JavaScript-Event-Challenges.pdf

https://www.coursera.org/learn/javascript-basics/supplement/PkaFc/javascript-event-challenges-22-30

# 3.20 Scope in JavaScript (5:19) {#scope-in-javascript-519 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image139.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4572648731408573in"}

The next topic we need to get into is the way scope works in JavaScript.
This is an important thing to understand because in JavaScript, when
JavaScript was originally written, you have to keep in mind that they
really thought that it was going to be very short scripts that were used
on web pages to do some interactive things, and that\'s about it. They
didn\'t expect JavaScript to become a general all-purpose programming
language at that point. Scope was not really very big of a concern, but
JavaScript has become a general programming language and scope is now a
pretty big concern and we need to be careful about it. This is another
thing in the language that is potentially problematic and you want to be
really clear about and have some best practices around, so you don\'t
make mistakes and get unexpected results and spend a lot of time chasing
down bugs in your code because that\'s no fun. Let\'s talk about how
scope works. If we look at this script over here, and I\'m actually
going to switch to my code editor over here so I have this written over
here, I have a variable called aVariable, and it\'s in the global scope.
It\'s not defined. It\'s defined within the script tag, but it\'s not
defined within any sort of function. Then I have a variable, also called
aVariable in the local scope. I\'m going to run a test scope, this
function here, which should print out this variable, and then I\'m going
to console log out aVariable which should print out that variable.
Let\'s see if that actually works. I\'m going to open a new tab here and
do Control O, and open up scope and click \"Open\" and we get that. I\'m
going to do inspect, and I\'m going to move this thing down to the
bottom and click on \"Console\" and you can see this is in the local
scope and this is in the global scope. So I have two variables with the
same name, with two different values and that\'s kind of that. It\'s not
really a great thing to have happened there. But you can do that thing
with JavaScript and it\'s not great. What does local scope mean? Well,
let\'s do this for a second. Let\'s go ahead and take this out of here
and then run that file again. Now, this one\'s running because it\'s
inside the local scope. But the one that says aVariable is not defined.
What happens here is that, if this variable, aVariable doesn\'t exist, I
can\'t access this one from outside this function because this variable
is only accessible within the scope of this function. That\'s what local
scope needs, it\'s that, it\'s local to inside the function and I can\'t
access it outside the function. That can be very important for making
sure that we don\'t have problems with the variables. Great. This is
what happens when things get even worse in JavaScript, and we\'ve seen
this before, is if I make a variable and I forget to use the var
keyword, that variable automatically becomes part of the global scope.
I\'m going to go ahead and add this in here and see what happens. I\'m
going to make another variable called, oopsGlobal, but I\'m not going to
use the var keyword, equals \"This is accidentally global\". Then down
here, you\'ll notice I can access that variable even though it\'s
defined, because we didn\'t use the var keyword, it\'s not really
defined inside the function. It belongs to the window. You\'ll notice
when I run this over here, this one runs. I couldn\'t access the local
scope variable because it was inside the function, but because I forgot
to use the var keyword here, if I put var in front of this, that will no
longer be global, and we\'ll get that error happening again. This is a
bad thing in JavaScript is that you get to accidentally leave out var,
just a keyword, and the variable will still be defined, but it will be
defined at the wrong scope level. That could lead to all kinds of
problems.

# 3.21 Strategy 1: Never Use Global Scope {#strategy-1-never-use-global-scope .unnumbered}

# 3.22  {#section .unnumbered}

# 3.23  {#section-1 .unnumbered}

# 3.24  {#section-2 .unnumbered}

# 3.25  {#section-3 .unnumbered}

# 3.26  {#section-4 .unnumbered}

# 3.27  {#section-5 .unnumbered}

# 3.28  {#section-6 .unnumbered}

# 3.29  {#section-7 .unnumbered}

# 3.30  {#section-8 .unnumbered}

# 3.31  {#section-9 .unnumbered}

# 3.32  {#section-10 .unnumbered}

# 3.33  {#section-11 .unnumbered}

# 3.34  {#section-12 .unnumbered}

# 3.35  {#section-13 .unnumbered}

# 3.36  {#section-14 .unnumbered}

# 3.37  {#section-15 .unnumbered}

# Week Four:  {#week-four .unnumbered}

# 4.00  {#section-16 .unnumbered}

# 4.01 Module 4 Introduction (1:05) {#module-4-introduction-105 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image140.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4572648731408573in"}

Hello, and welcome to the fourth module of this course. Congratulations
for making it this far. You\'ve learned a lot of JavaScript so far, and
this fourth module is going to really help you push your skills even
further. In this module, we\'ll be doing a lot of practice. To learn
JavaScript, you really have to practice. You have to get used to the
syntax. You have to think about how to break problems down into smaller
pieces to actually make something that works. And we\'ll be doing that
in this fourth module. And by creating interactive elements and
practicing what you\'ve already learned, you\'ll be making some things
that are interesting and fun, but also really learning JavaScript along
the way. So let\'s get to it. And hopefully, by the end of this module,
you\'ll be really excited about what you\'ve learned so far in this
course, and you\'ll be excited to go on to the next course and learn
even more about JavaScript.

### 4.01.Basic-Convert-START.zip

### https://www.coursera.org/learn/javascript-basics/supplement/g4gK7/basic-distance-converter-start-files {#httpswww.coursera.orglearnjavascript-basicssupplementg4gk7basic-distance-converter-start-files .unnumbered}

# 4.02 Basic Distance Converter Project -- Part 1 (6:28) {#basic-distance-converter-project-part-1-628 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image141.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4572648731408573in"}

In this project will take an interface that I\'ve already created, and
make it work so that we end up with this little tool that will convert
miles to kilometers. Through doing this project, you\'ll get to use a
bunch of the pieces we\'ve talked about already. Learning JavaScript.
You\'ll capture data from a form element, and manipulate the DOM, change
the DOM, by adding this actual conversion down here. We\'ll do a bunch
of the different types of things that we\'ve been doing so far with
JavaScript to create this little tool. The interface is already created,
you can see I have it over here. The HTML generates this interface, but
at this point it doesn\'t function. Our job today is to make this thing
actually function, and write the JavaScript to take the data that
somebody types into distance and convert it to kilometers. Let\'s take a
quick look at the HTML that we have here. Nothing too fancy here, we
just have some basic HTML with a form, and in a container down here
where the answer is going to go when we convert the miles. Then I\'ve
got some styling over here already in place, probably more startling
than I really need, but that\'s okay. We don\'t need to touch any of
that. At this point what we\'re going to do, is we\'re going to add a
script tag down at the bottom, and start figuring out how we\'re going
to capture this. Let\'s do that. Let\'s go ahead and add a script tag
here. Then in here we want to capture this submission of this form. You
call it convert. We\'ve got an Id for the forms or converts. We have a
document, getElementById. Then we want to get the Id convert. We want to
add an EventListener. The event we want to capture is a submit event.
When the form is submitted, we want to do something.

What do we want to do? We want to run a function. Now, all the rest of
the code for this script is going to go between these two curly braces
here inside this anonymous function. I can click there and move that
down. Great. We\'ve got our EventListener here. Now, normally, when
events happen like a submission of a form, what happens is, either the
data from the form goes to, if you have an action in here, like we do
here in this form, it would go to some PHP file to be handled, or if you
don\'t have an action, if you don\'t have this attribute here at all,
then what it\'ll do is, it will actually refresh the web page. We don\'t
want that to happen. We want to stop the normal processing of the form.
In that case we\'re going to pass in the special event object, and we
can pass it in as event or some people pass it in as evt or some people
will just use E. I\'m going to leave it as event just to make it clear
that that\'s what it is. It\'s the special event object. Then we\'re
going to keep that form from being processed by using
event.preventDefault, which is a method that will keep that form from
getting processed, and from refreshing the page, or trying to go to that
PHP file when we submit the form. That\'s the thing we want to do first
here. The next thing that we want to do, is we want to capture the data
that somebody typed into this input field here, with the idea of
distance. We want to capture that data, and we want to put it into a
variable. Let\'s make a variable distance, var distance. Then how would
we capture that data? Do you remember how to get that data out of that
field? See if you can think about how to type in the rest of this on
your own for a second, and try it. Just try to see what you can get. Try
and see what you get. See if you get in batches what I do here. I\'m
going to go ahead and put mine in, but hopefully this is what you got,
document.getElementById. Which Id do I want? I want this Id distance,
and what do I want from there? I want the dot value. That\'s going to
take whatever somebody is typed into the field, and stick it into this
variable distance. Let\'s give it a try real quick. If we do alert
distance, we should get that data coming up here. If I come back here
and refresh this, and then type in five, and click convert distance, you
can see that the alert pops up, and it gives me five. If I put 54,
it\'ll come up, and it\'ll give me a 54. That is capturing that value.
It\'s preventing the default behavior of submitting the form, and trying
to go to the PHP file. If you don\'t do EventPreventDefault, let\'s just
see what this happens for a second here. I just comment this out, and
come back here and refresh this. If I don\'t do PreventDefault convert
distance, it gives me the five, but then tries to go to some PHP file,
which we don\'t want. It is getting that data, but then it\'s trying to
go through to the form. We don\'t want that. We want to prevent the
default behavior and that\'s what that does. Great. We\'re getting that
distance there, and we\'re often running here with our project. Let\'s
pick it up in the next video.

# 4.03 Basic Distance Convert Project -- Part 2 (5:33) {#basic-distance-convert-project-part-2-533 .unnumbered}

The next thing that\'s important to understand is that when you type a
number in here, JavaScript sees that number as a string. If I type a
five in there, it\'ll be a string that holds the value five rather than
the number five. I need to actually take that string, and convert it to
a number. We could use a method in JavaScript called parseInt. But what
parseInt does is it will only capture the integer of the number rather
than a decimal number. It\'s possible that I would want to capture 5.5
miles and convert it to kilometers. What we\'re going to use instead is
parseFloat. What parseFloat will do is it\'ll allow us to take that
number and convert it to a floating decimal point. Down here, I\'m going
to leave the alert for a second here. But I mentioned before that, I\'m
going to say distance equals parseFloat distance. I\'m taking distance
and running it through parseFloat, then assigning it back to distance
and I can alert that out. Let\'s just see what that gives us over here.
If I come back and refresh this, you have to refresh it, if I put in a
five and convert distance, it\'ll give me a five. But if I put in
chicken, it\'ll give me NaN, not a number, which as you know, resolves
to false. Not a number is false, it\'s falsy, just like zero or a number
of other things are falsy, but a number is true. Five will work, 5.5
will work. Interestingly, zero won\'t, zero is still false. I don\'t
know why you\'d want to convert zero miles to kilometers since they\'re
both just zero. But that\'s what we need to do first to get that to turn
into a number. Now, down here, we can actually combine these two lines
into one line here by instead of having this distance, and then
assigning it back to itself, we could actually put parseFloat here with
its opening parentheses and then we can close the parentheses at the end
after the value, we can get rid of this line, that does the same thing
all in one line. It takes the value from the distance field and then
runs it through parseFloat and assigns it to distance. Remember,
JavaScript works from the inside out. The next thing we need to do is
check to see if distance is an actual number. If somebody put in
something that\'s not a number, we can\'t convert that to kilometers. We
need to make sure distance is a number. We can do that with an if
statement. Remember, if we put it in a number like five or 5.425 or
whatever it is, that\'s going to come back true. That\'s true, that\'s
truthy whereas if you put something that\'s not a number, parseInt is
going to convert it to NaN, which is not a number, and that comes back
false or zero will come back false, those kinds of things. We can just
say if distance is a number, because we\'re getting a number here, then
we\'re going to convert it around the distance and then put the answer
down at the bottom, otherwise it will display an error message down at
the bottom. Let\'s go ahead and add this if statement down here. We
probably don\'t need this alert for right now, I might end up moving it
in a minute. We\'re going do something there. We\'re going to convert
and then display the answer. Else, display here. Let\'s actually take
this alert distance here and stick it in here, we don\'t need it up here
anymore. You\'ll see now with that, if I test this, if I put a number in
here, it\'ll alert out the number that I put in there. If I put
something other than a number in there, it won\'t, because the else is
running. We haven\'t actually done anything with the else, but it is
running and it\'s not doing that alert. Great. We\'re all set up here
and ready to write the rest of our script. Let\'s go ahead and work on
that next.

# 4.04 Basic Distance Converter Project -- Part 3 (6:32) {#basic-distance-converter-project-part-3-632 .unnumbered}

\[MUSIC\] So a variable here, get rid of this Is making variable are
conversion. I\'ve been assigned it the conversion, which is distance
times one point 609344 and what that will give us is the actual distance
converted. But it\'s going to give us a very large number or a number
with a lot of numbers after the decimal point potentially. So charges do
here, alert conversion teachers all that very, all right. And test that
you\'ll see what I mean, I come back here, refresh this. I put in a five
here, I will get eight point. I don\'t want all these desperate numbers
and they can get even longer than that. Five 54 point 32 or something
like that. You\'d say, that\'s kind of long. I just want three here, I
just want three. So there are a couple different ways of addressing
this. In dealing with this, I\'m going to show you kind of the manual
way and then the way that\'s a little bit easier. I think sometimes
it\'s it\'s nice to see the manual way. So I\'m going to make another
variable car to do to rounded right gun equals math got random, not
random. That round math dot round. Now, if I just put in math around
conversion, yeah. But that\'s going to do is it\'s going around it to
the nearest whole number. I want some decimal points in there. So
really, what I want to do is I want to take that number and multiply it
by 1000 and then after the conversion, divide by 1000. So that\'s going
to take the number round it and then divided. We might need an extra set
of parentheses here just to make sure that it does theater part first.
So around that we take conversion multiplied by thousands, round it and
then divided by 1000. Now let\'s see what that gives us. We come back
here now if I try to convert this 54.32 Oops, I haven\'t air. Let\'s see
what I did wrong. There\'s always a good, good way to see what\'s going
on here. Console urgently not actually Jews E. I forgot to do the alert,
that\'s what\'s going on here. Lurch grounded conversion. All right try
that again 54.32 convert distance, and you could see that it\'s cropping
it off here after two decimal police is here really wanted more distant
places in that. The other thing you can do that\'s easier, a little bit
easier than this is to use, something called to fixed. It\'s a method
called to fixed so I could say conversion and put to fixed and three in
there and that will make sure I get surrounded to three decimal points.
Let\'s see what that does 54.32 and now I\'m getting 87 weeks, 4 to 0,
which is the right thing there. So that\'s actually rounding it and
making it work exactly the way I wanted to go, giving me three decimal
points. That\'s kind of the easiest method to work with years is to
fixed. Now I can actually put this all together in one line also, so I
could do a parenthesis e here in parenthesis e there, so does that first
and then dug to fixed. All right, and let\'s see if that works 54
convert distance mostly did something wrong there tonight. Now do I have
in here? Look, you can see avenue console rounded conversion is not
defined over here. When I to this, I needed to change this variable here
so you can see how I figured that out. It says around version. If it
says the variables not to find, you either sell something wrong, were
you using long? Terrible let\'s fix that. That\'s a really good example
of the kinds of things that could go wrong. Your inspector is your
friend. Always go in here and see if you can figure out sometimes the
messages or a little a produced by usually with some experience, you get
toe sort of see how that works. So there it is. That\'s working just
great. Okay, cool. Now we\'re ready to move on with the next part of the
script.

# 4.05 Basic Distance Convert Project -- Part 4 (6:15) {#basic-distance-convert-project-part-4-615 .unnumbered}

Okay, one thing we want to look at really quickly here before we go on
with the script, is at this h2 down here. Right now, I have an h2 in
there with a class of invisible. If you go look at the styles, you will
notice that this class, invisible, over here in the styles, it\'s
basically setting the color of that text to the same color as the
background of this div. Over here, if you go and actually look at this
thing, you\'ll notice down here, that the answers is in there. It\'s in
there, you can\'t really see it, because it\'s the same color, but it\'s
actually there. Currently, what it says is, answer goes here. What we
can do is, we can use inner HTML to replace this entire h2 in here, with
a new h2. That h2 that we put in there, won\'t have the class invisible,
so it will be visible. We want to get this div id answer here first. Up
here, let\'s get rid of this alert. We\'re going to work on this display
piece here. I\'m going to get rid of that. First thing I\'m going to do
is, I\'m going to have a variable var answer, and set that to equal to
Document.getElementById, answer. That\'s our element there that we\'re
getting. Then we want to get that element and we want to use inner HTML.
I\'m going to say answer dot inner HTML equals quote quote. In here,
I\'m going to add an h2, which opens and closes. It\'s always best to
open and close things right away, then in here, actually, rather than
use the quotes here, we you use the tick marks, like that, semicolon.
Let\'s do that again. H2 close h2. There we go. This is going to be a
string, literary when we\'re done here. In here, I\'m going to add the
distance, or let\'s see what do I want to put it in here. I want to put
in here distance, miles converts to x kilometers, where distance is
really this variable distance here. That\'s going to be a variable. In
there, I\'m going to put curly braces, dollar sign, curly braces,
distance, because that\'s a variable. Miles converts to, and x is going
to be dollar sign, curly braces, conversion in there. That should
actually work. Let\'s see if that actually works. Come back over here.
If I refresh this page, put a number in here, and click convert, you can
see 5 miles converts to you 8.047 kilometers. That works perfectly fine.
That\'s great. The next thing we need to do is handle the error down
here. We\'re going to put it into this same element here, this answer
element here. I could use Document.getElementByID, and go get this
answer div again, using innerHTML again. Since we\'ve already gotten
this and put it into this variable here, it makes more sense to move
this variable out of the if statement and stick it up here somewhere, go
anywhere really, I\'ll stick it here. That\'s going to get defined to
begin with. It could even go after the preventDefault, it go anywhere
really. I\'m going to just put it there. Then I can use the exact same
variable down here. Answer.innerHTML equals. Now, I don\'t have to use
the tick marks \[inaudible\] can pass any variables in here. I can just
use regular quotes, h2 close the H2. Always open and closed before it,
then work on the inside from that way. Please provide a number. That
will handle the error. Let\'s make sure that works. If we come back over
here, and refresh this, if I put a chicken in here, a chicken cannot get
converted to kilometers, so it says please provide a number. If I put a
number in here, that will converge just fine. Our little converter is
working great, and that\'s awesome.

# 4.06 Basic Distance Convert Project -- Part 5 (4:27) {#basic-distance-convert-project-part-5-427 .unnumbered}

This is our entire script and it\'s working pretty well at this point.
It seems to be working fine. We\'ve done a little bit of refactoring to
get it to a little bit more compact and a little bit more readable.
We\'ve tried a few different methods to make that all work, and it\'s
all working great. We could leave the script at the bottom of the page,
there\'s not that much to it and it\'s fine. But just for the sake of
practice, let\'s move it to an external file and link it up and then use
our scope and best practices for converting everything. I\'m going to
come over here, I\'m going to need

to make a folder. I\'m going to make a file and call it script.js. On
that file, I\'m going to add my IIFE, my immediately invoked function
expression. That starts with parentheses, and then in there I add a
function with its parentheses and it\'s curly braces, and then another
set of parentheses and a /semicolon. This thing will run when the script
file loads, and my script is going to go inside the curly braces, so
I\'m going to move those down. Also I\'m going to add in here my use
strict directive, which is going to make sure that I\'m not defining any
variables without the var keyword, they don\'t get put into the wrong
scope. You don\'t really have to worry that much about scope here since
it\'s all pretty much within this one event handler, but still it\'s a
good idea to put it in. Then I\'m going to just going to copy all of
this stuff, or you can cut it and paste it over here. There we go.
There\'s our script. In here, I\'m going to come in and change my vars
to either const or lat. I think they will all work with const. Distance
is going to get that once, and that\'s in distance is not going to
change. Const is going to come down here and answer is always going to
be answer, and then this one here const as well, conversion. We\'ve got
all of that set. Great. Over here on my HTML file, instead of having
this script here, I can leave it at the bottom of the screen if I want,
that\'s fine, and just link to it here, src equals \"scripts.js\", and
that should work just fine. If I go ahead and test that, it should work
exactly the same as it worked before, and it works fine, that\'s great.
Now, I could also move the script up into the head of the page. Up here
into the head, but I have to add the defer attribute here. If I come
back and test it, you\'ll see that it still works. If you forget the
defer attribute up here, then it\'s going to try to run that script
before the page loads and it won\'t work properly. Your file couldn\'t
be accessed. It\'s trying to go to the some PHP file because that script
never loaded and it never prevented the default behavior. That didn\'t
work, so you need to have that differ keyword in there to make sure that
the script is deferred until the rest of the file loads. But there we
have it. It\'s a great little tool and it\'s allowed us to practice many
of the things that we\'ve been talking about during this course, and
we\'ll look at a slightly more advanced version of the project next.

### 4.06.Advanced-Distance-Convert-START-Files.zip

https://www.coursera.org/learn/javascript-basics/supplement/WRAUF/advanced-distance-converter-start-files

# 4.07 Advanced Distance Converter Project -- Part 1 (5:13) {#advanced-distance-converter-project-part-1-513 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image142.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4572648731408573in"}

Advanced Distance Converter, Using JavaScript to Convert Distances. In
this project, we\'re going to use an extension to what we did in the
earlier project for the distance converter. We\'re just going to add an
additional feature. What that additional feature is, it\'ll convert
miles to kilometers, where we can press the \"K\" key to convert
kilometers to miles, or we can press the \"M\" key to go back. We can go
back and forth between doing different types of conversions. That\'s
neat. If I put a five in here and click \"Convert Distance\", it\'ll
tell me five kilometers converts to 3.107 miles, or if I press the \"M\"
key, I can convert five miles to 8.047 kilometers. That\'s pretty neat.
Notice that a few things are changing when I do this, the header changes
here, this little piece of instruction changes slightly here, and a few
other things have to be managed down here. I\'ve got a set of
instructions down here in the bottom of the page that tell you which
keys to press, and that kind of stuff. That gets us set up to start
coding this project and getting the script working. You\'ll notice that,
if you look at the Start file here, it looks very similar to what we had
before. We just need to get started with a script tag down here, and
then the very first thing we\'re going to put in there is just some
variables that we need in order to make this work. We\'re going to need
a variable called convertType that\'s going to be set initially to
miles, and then when you press the \"K\" key or the \"M\" key, it\'s
going to update that value to kilometers or miles, depending on which
key you pressed. We\'ll be capturing keypresses and doing that kind of
thing. Let\'s do that. Then we also need to get the h1 because we\'re
going to change that in the intro text. We might as well gather the
answer element down there as well, and also the form that we have in
there. Let\'s go ahead and add these variables really quickly. Var
convertType. I\'m going to set it to miles initially. Then I\'ve got
var, and I\'ve got heading equals document dot querySelector(\'h1\'),
that will get the heading. Then we need this intro paragraph here, var,
and just to make it match what I have over here, it doesn\'t really
matter, I\'m just going to call it intro, equals document dot

querySelector: \"p\". This is the first paragraph on the page. Actually,
it\'s the only paragraph on the page. Remember, the querySelector will
grab the first one that it finds, so that\'s handy. I can just do
querySelector: \"p\" I don\'t have to do anything complicated to get to
that paragraph. We can get to that. We might as well grab this answerDiv
down here. Var answerDiv equals document dot getElementById, and the ID
I need for that is \'answer\'. Then we might as well also get the actual
form. Var form equals document dot getElementById, and the form is as
the ID, set to \'convert\'. That gives us all the

variables that we need right here at the top of our script, and we\'re
ready to start working on what we need to work on to continue the
script. We\'ll pick that up in the next video.

# 4.08 Advanced Distance Converter Project -- Part 2 (5:44) {#advanced-distance-converter-project-part-2-544 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image143.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4427351268591426in"}

Okay, next we need two add to event listeners. One is going to handle
key down. When we handle the press of the K key, the M key and the other
one is going to handle the submission of the form. Let\'s add these two
event listeners before we do anything else. Come over here to my code.
Down here, my script, I\'m going to have

document.addEventListener. The event I\'m listening for is a key down
event. Key down, and then I\'m going to run a function. Everything for
that event listener will go between those curly braces, that\'s one.
Then we need to deal with the submission of the form. We already have a
variable that\'s getting that form by ID, so I can just do the

form.addEventListener, and again, we want to do submit. When the form is
submitted, we want to run the function. It\'s going to run and do all
the fancy stuff. That is going to happen in there. All right, great.
We\'ve got our two event listeners and we\'re ready to

get started with this and we\'ll work on the key-down event listener
first. To do that, we\'re going to pass in the event object here. Before
we had used event.which, to figure out which

key was pressed. But event.which is now deprecated. Really what they
want us to be using over MDN is event.code. Let\'s assign that to a
variable, var key equals event.code. Then I\'m going to alert

our key to see what I get. All right great, let\'s go over here and test
this. If I refresh and I press the M key, I\'m not getting anything. Did
I do something wrong?

Inspect, I don\'t have an error. Alert key, an event listener document.
Event listener should be right. No, I did that right, I was just on the
wrong file. Make sure you have the

right file loaded. That\'s always a good idea to make sure you\'re
working with the correct file it happens sometimes. Let\'s try this
again. If I press the M, I get

key M. If I press the K, I get key K. This is the new method that they
want you to use that\'s not deprecated for grabbing keys. Instead of
giving you a number, gives you actually a key within the letter than the
actual

letter that you\'re pressing. That\'s great, that\'s super useful. We
know how to actually capture those keys and know which one has been
pressed. From here, writing the If

statement is very simple, now that we know what to expect. We can say if
key is the same as; you could even do triple equals if you wanted to.
Key K, We\'re going

to do one thing. Else, if key is the same as key M we\'re going to do
something else. What are we going to do in here? We\'re going to do some
things like, first we\'re going to change

the header. The heading. We\'re going to change the intro paragraph. You
need to do that, and also we need to change the value, the convertype
variable. We\'re going to change this variable from

miles to kilometers. If you press the K key and then we\'re going to
turn it back to miles if you press that one. Those are three things that
we need to do in each of these as we go forward

here with this function. I\'ll handle that in the next video.

# 4.09 Advanced Distance Converter Project -- Part 3 (5:48) {#advanced-distance-converter-project-part-3-548 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image144.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.053418635170604in"}

Okay, so now we\'re going to put this in here, and first I\'m going to
actually do it the other way around. And it have var \[COUGH\] where
I\'m going to set convertType. because we already have it defined

up there, so you don\'t use var. convertType = Kilometers. So that\'s
going to get set to kilometers as a value, as opposed to miles. You
could just use K and M in there if you wanted to keep it short, and
that\'s fine. And then I\'m going to change

the heading in here next. Like that, heading,innerHTMML = Kilometers to
Miles converter. So that\'s going to change that heading up at the top
of the page. And then the third thing I want to do

is just change the intro paragraphs. So let\'s do that next. So that\'s
this variable here, intro. So I can very easily just type intro, if I
could spell it right, .InnerHTML = and then I\'m just going to paste
this in,

but you\'re going to have to type it. Type in a number of kilometers and
click the button to convert the distance to miles. There we go. So
we\'ve got all of these set in here,

that\'s great. And really, what we need to do is put the same thing down
below. I\'m just going to copy it And paste it. But instead of
kilometers it\'s going to be miles. And then over here we\'re going to

say Miles to Kilometers converter. And then type the number of miles,
and click the button to convert the distance to kilometers. That\'s nice
and easy. Great, so that should be working in

terms of which key I pressed here and how that\'s going to work. And if
I come over and test this, you should see if I press the K key, it
switches to kilometers to miles, the statement changes. And if I press
the M key it switches back. So that\'s working great so far. Excellent.
Now we can start the second part of

the script which is the form submission handler. And we can pass in the
event andonce again do event.preventDefault to keep that form from being
submitted, actually submitted. So we\'re going to pass in

our event object here. And down here again do event.preventDefault.
Great, and then we want to do the same thing we did before and get our
variable out of their distance. var distance = document.getElementByID.
And we\'re going into our form and

up here in our form we\'re getting this distance ID here. So
getElementByID (\'distance\').value like that. But just as we did before
we want to put parseFloat in front of this, parseFloat, parentheses, and
then close the parentheses at

the end after value there. So that will actually take that and put that
in there. Just like we did before. Also, same as before, we\'re going to
stay if (distance), if that\'s really a number, then we\'re going to do
something here,

right? Otherwise, we\'re going to do something down here, else, and
really, what we want is just to set that answer.InnerHTML = h2 and in
there I\'m going to just say please provide a number. Something like
that, and that\'s fine. So that will handle the error down there

if somebody doesn\'t put in a number. But in here, what we\'re going to
do is this is we\'re going to do something different, and see if you can
think about what we need to do. We need to check to see what the value

of this variable convert type is because it\'s either set to miles or
kilometers. And this is one reason why we set these variables. We
initialized this variable out here in the global scope, so we would have
access to it down here, as well,

inside this event listener function here. So we want to be able to have
access to that variable there. We need to see what it is, because if
it\'s one, we\'re going to do one type of conversion, if it\'s the
other, we\'re

going to do another type of conversion. And we\'ll look at that next.

# 4.10 Advanced Distance Converter Project -- Part 4 (6:28) {#advanced-distance-converter-project-part-4-628 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image145.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.053418635170604in"}

Okay, so now we need to actually do the conversion here, and based on
which value this variable has your convert type. So, to convert miles to
kilometers, the \[COUGH\] the ratio is this and to convert. K to M, the
ratio is. This. Okay, so see if you can figure out what we need to do
inside this, if statement to handle both the conversions, see if you can
get it on your own. Pause this video and see if you can write

the if statement you need in order to do this using these two values for
numbers here. Hopefully you got something like this, if convert type is
the same as miles. We\'re going to convert that there. Else, we\'ll
convert the other one. So if it\'s the same as miles,

we\'re going to take distance, we\'re going to have variable var
converted. Something like that, equals. Distance. Times this number
here. Right, now we can put parentheses around that. And then do to
fixed. To give us three decimal places. So that\'s what happens if

we\'re converting to miles, whereas down here in the else converted is
going to be set to. This value. And then we can just set the answer too,
right? Answer.innerHTML equals we\'re going to use your tech marts and
we\'re going to say. X miles converts to y kilometers. But x is now
going to be,

now x it\'s going to be dollar sign curly braces, and in there I\'m
going to put distance converts to. Dollar sign curly braces. Converted.
There we go. And down here, it\'s going to be the same thing. Answer,
copy that, stick that down here

except instead of miles, that\'s going to say kilometers converts to
miles. Save that. There we go, so now we\'re able to convert both miles
and kilometers and put the correct answer. Yet if somebody enters in
something,

that\'s not a number that will still be handled, and that should work,
let\'s test it and see. Refresh miles to kilometers if I put in one mile
that converts to 1.69 kilometers, that\'s correct. If I press my K key
kilometers to miles, convert and I get 0.61 miles, and that\'s correct.
Do 10 and test it and you\'ll see that you\'ll get the correct answers,
press M convert and

you could see that\'s working. So there we go, we have a working
distance converter for more advanced, and more advanced distance
converted, that will allow us to switch between miles and kilometers for
our converting. And over here in our script, the important thing to
recognize here is that we\'re using a variable up here at the top
convert type. And we\'re adjusting the value of that

variable here based on the key that\'s pressed. And then, based on the
value of that variable in this function down here, we\'re we\'re
adjusting which one of these were going to be using based on what the
value of that variable is. Now, this is where we\'re starting

to get into some scope and some it\'s a little bit more complex because
we\'re looking at a value that you need to get set in this function
here, and then access it in that function there. And we\'re doing that
by

defining the value up here. So that\'s pretty cool. So the last thing
you should do with this is put it all into a script file at the top of
and link it to the top of the page instead of having it here in the
bottom, and use all your best practices for that.

# 4.11 Advanced Distance Converter Project -- Part 5 (5:23) {#advanced-distance-converter-project-part-5-523 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image146.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.053418635170604in"}

You may not need to watch this video right now, but because you should
know how to do this already, but I\'m going to do it anyway. I\'m going
to create a new file

here called script dot js, and really you can name the file whatever you
want. On this file, I\'m going to add my function here, my function that
will

run automatically, function and it\'s parenthesis and curly braces, and
an extra set of parenthesis at the end. This is my automatically invoked
function here. Then everything\'s going to

go inside the curly braces, and down here I\'m going to add, use strict
that directive to make sure I don\'t have any variables being defined in
the wrong place. Then I\'m going to come

in here and just copy all of this script, the whole thing, all the way
from the top, all the way down to the bottom. I\'m going to paste it
over here, I\'m just going to paste it right in there, like that. Into
tab it back one, shift tab, there we go. Now for this one, it\'s

more important to do this then we than for the previous script,
partially because there\'s more code going on here, but also because we
actually have some globally

defined variables here. It\'s possible that you want these to not get
used in the wrong place down there. AnswerDiv that\'s great. Did I do
the wrong thing, down here? I did should be answerDiv. There we go.,
I\'m

sure that matches. That should put that into the right place there.
Great. Over here in our file, we can get rid of this stuff, and instead,
we can link to SRC

equals script dot js. There we go. There we have it, so that should work
great. Now we could move this up to the top of the file here. Defer,
there we go. That should all

work just as well, so if I come back here and refresh this distance,
five convert that\'s working. Ten, convert and that\'s working. I should
be able to press

miles to kilometers, and do the other conversions as well. That\'s all
working perfectly fine and has been refactored a little bit so that this
is all over here. The one last thing I didn\'t

do is I didn\'t come in. Now this one needs to be left because that
one\'s going to actually change values. But this one can be const. Then
down here const. Just test it one more time, always was tests to make
sure you didn\'t set the wrong thing, but it should work five miles.
Press the M, or the K key test it again and

that\'s working just great. Great. We have a great little utility here
for converting miles to kilometers and kilometers to miles, not that you
needed

something like this, but we have used a lot of the things that we\'ve
learned about in this course so far, in terms of capturing some data
from a form, being able to

manipulate that data, and then change the DOM, change the actual webpage
based on what the user has done, including capturing key presses, which
is pretty neat.

### 4.11.Vacation-Destination-Part1-START.zip

https://www.coursera.org/learn/javascript-basics/supplement/h9569/vacation-desitnation-project-part-1-start-files

# 4.12 Vacation Destination Project: HTML & CSS -- Part 1 (6:06) {#vacation-destination-project-html-css-part-1-606 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image147.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4427351268591426in"}

Vacation destination west. For this part, we\'re going to be building
the HTML and CSS for this vacation destination wish list app for lack of
a better word,

we\'ll call it a nap. It\'s not really an application in that it\'s not
really that sophisticated. There\'s no database involved or anything
like that but, we\'ll call it a nap for lack of a better term if you I

want to think of it differently. And basically what we\'ll do here is
we\'ll have a form and you can add Place that you want to go visitors
see in the form, and it will add it to your wish list

with the picture and everything. So, that\'s pretty cool and pretty fun,
but before we get there, we need to build up the HTML and CSS, and in
previous projects, I\'ve given you the HTML and CSS done,

but with JavaScript because it\'s such a relationship between
JavaScript, the HTML and CSS, the three of them together working
together to create your interface. It\'s important to see how the HTML

comes together for this project. It\'s not super complicated, but it\'s
definitely mawr complex than the previous projects we\'ve done the
distance, converted projects and

those kinds of things. So this is a really great capstone for the end of
the first course, which will really bring together everything that
you\'ve learned in this course so far. And again, we\'ve got three

more courses to go after this, you\'ll become an expert with javascript
if you keep going but let\'s start here. Okay, three user\'s going to
add some some information to the page here and including a u R l for

picture but if no, you are l for pictures provided it will put a generic
image in there for them. And if we go over and look at the files that
we\'ve got the start files that you\'re going to start with, you\'ll
notice that we have some images in here and I have a sign post JPEG
that\'s going

to be used as a default image there. If an image is not provided by the
user when they add their item to the list. Other than that, the page is
fairly simple we\'ve got a link to the normalize CSS script,

which all that does is make sure that different browsers render pretty
much the same way. Sort of normalizes the differences between different
browsers in the way they render things so that you don\'t end up with a
different

looking page in a different browser. And usually it\'s just minor
things, like different spacing and stuff like that but, that could be
frustrating if you\'re a designer and you\'re you want it to look a
certain

way and and it and it changes up. Plus, we have linked a style sheet,
which is currently empty, and we\'ll be adding some styles in there and
then on a body of our page. We have linked a JavaScript file,

which is also empty, and in part two will actually be building the
JavaScript for this project. So that\'s where we are, let\'s see where
we need to go first to get this thing started, the first thing

we need to do is add a header element which will open and close, and
inside the header element, I\'m going to add an H one heading and a
paragraph, and I\'m going to paste them in here but you\'re going to
have to type these. So the H one vacation destinations with

wish list that\'s going to be our main. Each one for the page should
have Your Web pages should have a main heading. If it all possible, that
Google will search an index and that kind of stuff, and then I\'ve gotta
follow a paragraph found exciting places to,

to visit on your next vacation. It\'s my English there places to visit
on your next vacation. Use the form below to add them to your wish list
probably should put a period at the end of that paragraph two. So there
we go, so we\'ve got kind of,

place to start here and a little bit of language to get us going. Once
you have that done after the header, how the main element. And inside
the main element, we\'re going to add a form just going to open and
close, and then inside the form, we\'re going to add a button which is a
can open and close. The form needs an ID and

the idea that I\'m going to use and you can use something different if
you want, but because this one\'s a little bit long, but, but it\'s kind
of descriptive for me, so I\'m going to use this I\'d destination
underscore details or no spaces. Destination details for and then the
button is going to get a type, attributes type equals quotes a bit. Here
we go. And then we need to add some text to

the button, which is going to be add to list something like that had to
wish list something like that. That could be the text that shows up on
the button here, okay, great. We\'ll stop here, and we will pick this up
in the next video.

# 4.13 Vacation Destination Project: HTML & CSS -- Part 2 (7:33) {#vacation-destination-project-html-css-part-2-733 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image148.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.053418635170604in"}

Next, we\'ll add two fields. One is going to hold the name of the
destination and the other is going to hold the location of the
destination. Each of these fields

needs a label element, destination name and that takes a for attribute
for name. That for attribute connects to the id of the input that goes
with it. Input type equals text, id equals name, and then also we want
to make

sure that users use this, so I\'m just going to put required. Now your
browser has to support this for this to actually work, but rather than
built-in

some form validation, which we\'re going to do in the next course.
We\'ll talk more about form validation. But here we\'ll just use the
built-in browser form validation, which isn\'t perfect,

but it\'ll help. Now we\'ve got a field here that is required that has
an id that\'s going to match the for attribute, and it\'s typed text.
Great. Then we\'re going to need another one, label for location. Maybe
I\'ll do

destination location something like that and then of course we need the
input for that, input type equals text, id equals location, and required
just like before. There we go, so we\'ve got those two fields in place.
From there we\'re going to add a couple more

fields, I think. Yes, we want two more fields. One for the photo, so
I\'m going to have a label for photo. This one is going to be an input
type equals URL because we\'re going to paste in a URL here for a photo
that\'s already online rather than upload a

photo or anything like that, that would be much more complicated. But we
can just very easily find a photo online of where we want to put it and
put that in there, and your id is going to be set to your photo. This
one is not going to

be required because we can have a default photo in case we need it. Then
the last one we need label for description will have a location or
destination description. This is going to be a text area, like so. It
needs to have an id, so to description

to match the for attribute, and there we go. A form is basically built.
The only thing that would be nice is if we had some placeholder text in
these fields. We can add a placeholder

attribute and set this one to provide a name for the destination, 10
year will do a placeholder. Where is this destination located, for the
photo we can

do on there as well. Provide a URL for a photo and for the description,
or maybe describe the destination, and it gives us few things to look
for, few directions for our

user, which is helpful. Great, so we\'ve got that, we can save that, and
we\'re ready to add the element that\'s going to take the results we put
in there. That will be an article

after the format an article, and then we\'re going to add an h2 with an
id set to title. Initially, this h2 is going to have a value set to
enter destination details. That\'s giving us some

instructions there. Then after that, we\'re going to have just a div
that\'s going to be a container for this thing, and it\'s going to get
an id destinations container like so. This div is really

going to have in it the content generated by JS. That\'s going to get
the content that JavaScript is going to actually generate is going to go
inside

this container. I believe that pretty much finishes the HTML that we
need for now. That\'ll pretty much finish the software for all the HTML
we need. Save the file and then let\'s just go take a quick

look at it over here. If I refresh this, you\'ll see it doesn\'t look
like much, doesn\'t look very good. We don\'t have any styling in here
yet, so we\'ll do the styling next.

# 4.14 Vacation Destination Project: HTML & CSS -- Part 3 (7:03) {#vacation-destination-project-html-css-part-3-703 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image149.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4427351268591426in"}

We have the HTML in place, and now we\'re ready to start styling the
page and making it look a little bit better. We have the normalized
script up at the top of the page, which will help smooth

out the differences between different browsers But beyond that,
personally, I find it helpful to zero out some margins and padding and
some elements and then

add them back the way I want them in order to get them to work. I have
here a few reset CSS things that are helpful in general. This is just my
own personal preference. You could leave these out if

you wanted to but generally, I think they help with zeroing out some of
the base styles that most browsers displayed by default. I\'m going to
go ahead

and add these in. Over here I\'m going to add on my style sheet here a
rule for h1, h2, h3, h4, ul, li and paragraphs. I don\'t know what\'s
going on with that. I\'m putting this in

the script page, styles h1, h2, h3, h4, ul, li, and paragraphs. Margin
0, padding 0. That just gets rid of the margin and padding the zones.
It\'s also helpful to say img max-width 100 percent. I think that\'s

helpful to make sure images don\'t bust out of their containers. If you
put an image in for URL that\'s too big to fit in the container, it will
overflow it. We don\'t want that to happen. We\'ll set that as well, and
then I also have over here just some

styles for the body. I\'m going to set the font to Arial. Arial is the
font that most computers have so they work pretty well. I\'m going to
set the color of the text to dark gray in

this basic rule here. Let\'s just add that really quickly as well. I\'m
going to have body, font-family, Arial and color 333. Already you\'ll
see that the page is starting to come together

a little bit with some of that styling. There we go. Notice that we\'ve
lost a bunch of the margin and padding on those things. Next we\'re
going to

style up the header and the main content to get them to look the way we
want them to look. Header, I\'m going to set the padding background
color, text align center, the

color of the text in there, and then the margin on the bottom. Let\'s go
ahead and do that. Header, padding, 50 px, background color. I\'m using
this cornflower blue. We\'re setting the color

of the text to white. Text-align, center. I put the margin, bottom 20
px, and anything else that I did over here. That\'s all good. All right.
Good. Then for main, we\'re going to have a

max-width of 800 pixels, padding 20 pixels, margin auto that will center
it on the page, display flex, that will make the two items in there sit
next to each other and justify-content space-between, and then we\'ll
set percentage width or a specific width for those two items that are

going to sit next to each other on the page there. Let\'s go ahead and
add that in. Main, max-width, 800px. It\'s a narrow page, but that\'s
okay for

what we\'re doing. Display, flex. That turns it into a flexbox and, I
did some stuff with margin and padding. What did I do here? Padding 20
pixels margin auto. That above there. Actually

it doesn\'t really matter. Padding 20 px, margin auto. There we go. Then
with display flex we do justify-content, space-between which will put a
gap between those two items. The two items that are going

to go next to each other are the form on the left, and then this article
on the right, those become flex items. They\'re going to go to sit next
to each

other in our design. Just like that and even with just those two rules,
you\'ll see it\'s starting to come together a little bit there. Not very
much yet, but it\'s

starting to come together. Okay. Great. Well pick up the styling in the
next video.

# 4.15 Vacation Destination Project: HTML & CSS -- Part 4 (6:56) {#vacation-destination-project-html-css-part-4-656 .unnumbered}

# ![](./images/media/image150.png){width="4.0in" height="2.4427351268591426in"} {#section-17 .unnumbered}

Next, we\'re going to set the width of the form and the article
respectively. We\'ll add some margin back in the bottom of these
elements so they start to look a little bit better

and then the title is going to get text-align to the center. We\'ll be
able to do all of that here. Let\'s go ahead and add that into our style
sheet here. Main.form will target the

form itself width 40 percent. Setting it up a little bit to be
responsive but not entirely. Main article is going to be width 45
percent. That adds up to 85 percent, which means that 15 percent

will be left to be the gap between those two to create a little bit of a
gutter between these two columns here. We\'ve got that in, and then we
can just put the margin in the bottom

of these elements, h1, h2, h3, h4, we have all those, we might
margin-bottom 1em. You might be wondering, well, it seems silly to tick
the margin out up above and then put it

back in down below. But I\'ve found that I get a lot more control over
the look of my pages and the visual spacing between things. If these
elements

only have margin on the bottom and not margin on top and bottom, which
is what they get by default in most browsers. If save that and check it
over here, you can see it\'s starting to come together a little bit
more. But the last thing I was going to do is center that title over
there. We\'ve got #titled text-align center. There we go. Let\'s see
what else we need to do for styling. Got that going so that is centered
over there now it\'s great. Now, we\'re just going to do a little bit
with forms. With forms, you can spend a lot of time designing forms and
styling them. We\'re just going to do a little bit right now. What you
should notice to begin with is that by default, form elements are inline
or phrasing elements and we\'ll go next to each other and we don\'t
really like that. We wanted to stack. If you set them to display block
and then work with them, they\'re a little bit easier to work with.
Let\'s go ahead and add these rules in here. For the label, we\'re going
to tell that to display block and put a little bit of margin on the
bottom margin-bottom, 1em is fine. That\'s cool. That\'ll work. Then for
the other thing we\'ve got input, we\'ve got the text area, and we\'ve
got this form. Put it a half over here. I called it, which is the
destination details form button. This is just the button inside the form
and I\'m being

specific because we might end up with another button leader,
#destinaton_details_form button. That\'s specific button that\'s in over
here, so that\'s this form, destination_details_form, and then this
button down here and put an ID on it. Being specific there and what we
want to set is just display block width 100 percent margin-bottom 1em
and put a little border on it with a sort of medium gray and some
padding and box-sizing border-box. Let\'s do that. Display block that
will make each one ticket its own line. What was it again now? Width 100
percent margin-bottom 1em. We get that. Border 1px solid 666, padding
10px, box-sizing border-box. With box-sizing border-box, does is it
makes the padding and border part of the width of the element? Remember,
we set the width to 45 percent so we don\'t want to extend beyond that
size there. Cool. Let\'s take a look and see what that looks like over
here. That\'s looking much better, much cleaner. We will finish up the
HTML in the next video. I mean the styling in the next video.

# 4.16 Vacation Destination Project: HTML & CSS -- Part 5 (4:32) {#vacation-destination-project-html-css-part-5-432 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image151.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4427351268591426in"}

We\'re going to add cards dynamically using JavaScript, but we want to
know what they\'re going to look like. The best way to do this is to add
one manually, add a card that would get added by JavaScript with all the
correct HTML, style that so we know that what it\'s supposed to look
like, and then remove that card. That\'s what we\'ll do next. We\'re
going to start by going back and adding just a little bit more HTML. We
need a div with a class of card and an image with the signpost, and then
in there we\'re going to have the card body with an H3 and H4 and a
paragraph in button. We do have another button here. Let\'s go in and
add this into our HTML over here. It\'s going to go down here inside
this generated content by JavaScript here we\'re going to do div class
equals card. This has to be a class because we\'re going to have
multiple cards. We\'d have multiple cards on the page, so you can only
use an id once. That has to be a class. Then let\'s add an image.
Images/signpost. I\'m not going to put in all tag on it at the moment.
We\'ve got that image and then we\'ve got the card body coming next.
Div, class, card-body. I don\'t know why that is slightly misaligned.
No, it\'s right. Maybe it\'s this one, it\'s slightly misaligned. Here
we go. Div class card-body. Then inside the card body we\'re going to
add h3 destination name. Then we\'ll do a h4 destination location. Then
we\'re to add a Paragraph p with a class set to card-text, destination
description. Then we\'re going to add a button that will allow you to
remove the card if you need to. We\'ll have a feature that will allow
you to take a card off, so we\'ll add that button in there. I believe
that\'s what we need for the HTML. Let\'s take a look over here. Yeah,
there we go. Great. So we\'ve got all of the HTML for that card in. It
won\'t look particularly good. Let\'s see what it looks like. Doesn\'t
look terrible, but it looks okay, but we might want to do a little bit
more with it. Actually, it\'s fine for now. We\'ll leave it the way it
is. We\'ve got our basic card in there. Although I do have a background
color in there, don\'t I? Let\'s have that. Instead. One last rule down
here. For the card. I\'m going to just give it a little bit of padding,
set a background color, and set some margin on the bottom and that
should look good. Let\'s take a look and see how that goes. There we go.
Now we\'ve got a card that\'s looking good. Ultimately, these are going
to be put in through JavaScript.

# 4.17 Vacation Destination Project: HTML & CSS -- Part 6 (4:13) {#vacation-destination-project-html-css-part-6-413 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image152.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4427351268591426in"}

The HTML and CSS is in place now. And now that we\'ve got that in place,
we can start thinking about how this little application is going to
work. Essentially, user\'s going to type in a name and a location, and
provide a URL for a photo and a little bit of a description here. And
then that will get added, that card will get added to the list over
here. Let\'s take a look at a little bit of a flow chart to sort of see
how this is going to work and how we\'re going to kind of make that all
work out here. So over here on the right side of this page, you see we
have a little program here that when it starts, we\'re going to, when
somebody fills out that form, we\'re going to prevent the default form
submission. We\'re going to get the value from that destination name,
the location field, the photo field, the description field. And then
we\'re going to clear out the fields in the form, create a card, create
that HTML, and check to see, is the destination list empty? If it is,
then we\'re going to change the title on the destination list up at the
top. If it isn\'t, then we\'ll just upend the card to the container. In
either case, we\'ll upend the card to the container, and we\'ll be able
to move on from there, okay? So that\'s going to be the basic strategy
for how we add stuff to the page. So the first time we had something to
the page, this title is going to get changed, but otherwise it\'s not.
So that\'s the only thing that\'s kind of going on there that\'s
interesting. These are going to be your little helper functions, clear
out the fields, and then we\'re going to have a helper function that\'s
going to create the actual card. So those are the next functions we need
to look at here. The creating the card looks like a really long
function, but it\'s very sequential. And basically we\'re just going to
create a div and set the class to card, create an image tag, set the alt
attribute on the image tag. And then if the photo\'s provided, we\'re
going to set that source to whatever the URL is. If it isn\'t, well,
we\'ll use the default photo and then assign that to the image element
on the DOM that we just created. And then we\'ll create a div element.
So basically, we\'re creating the elements manually or having JavaScript
create them, to create these elements here. We\'re creating all of this
HTML here. For each card, we\'re going to create that information, and
then we\'re going to stick it on the card, and that\'s what\'s going on
here. And you\'ll notice down here we\'ve got another helper function
here for deleting the card. So if somebody clicks that remove button,
then we need to be able to handle that as well. So let\'s take a look at
that really quickly. So we\'ve got a function here for going through the
form fields and emptying out the form fields. And then we\'ve got a
little function here for deleting the card if we want to delete the
card. So we\'ve got a number of pieces here to write in our JavaScript
to create this little application, this little functionality for this
destination list. And that\'s it for part one. We\'ve created the
interface that we\'re going to be using. And you may be wondering why we
spent all this time in HTML and CSS. But it\'s really important to
understand how the HTML and the CSS interact with the JavaScript,
because all three come together to make the full interface and to make
all the functionality work. So I think it\'s worth taking the time to
build the HTML and the CSS for this project. So you understand what\'s
going on and how the JavaScript is going to manipulate that HTML and CSS
in the end to make the final product.

### 4.17.Vacation-Destination-Project-Part-2-START-Files.zip

https://www.coursera.org/learn/javascript-basics/supplement/D2III/vacation-destination-project-part-2-start-files

# 4.18 Vacation Destination Project: JavaScript -- Part 1 {#vacation-destination-project-javascript-part-1 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image153.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4559831583552056in"}

Vacation Destination List, part two.

![](./images/media/image154.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4427351268591426in"}

This part we will add the JavaScript and I\'m picking up exactly where I
left off after part one. In part one, you created the HTML and the CSS,
and you should have a page that looks like this. If you don\'t, please
go back and make sure you go through everything to make sure that you
get a page that looks like this before you start and you\'ve got all the
elements in there correctly, everything spelled right. Okay, now we\'ll
write the JavaScript we need to make this little application work. To
start with, let\'s grab the actual destination details form and put that
into a variable called details form and then we\'ll have a event
listener for when that form is submitted and instead of running an
anonymous function we\'re actually going to run a name function called
handleFormSubmit and then we\'ll start writing the beginning of that
function. Let\'s get started with this right off the bat. Over here,
I\'m going to open up my script file and add a variable var destination.
No. I\'m sorry, that\'s wrong. I\'m going to do a details form equals
document.querySelector and then I\'m going to go get this pound details,
you know this one is destination form details I think. Just check that
really quickly here. Get this form here, destination. In fact if you
want to be absolutely certain you spelled everything right it\'s always
a good idea, especially these long names to copy and paste that. Note
that I\'m using a pound sign here because I\'m using querySelector, you
could also use getElementByID but that\'ll get that form and put it in
here. And that\'s great. Now we can do an \[inaudible\] for details
form. Detailsform.addEventListener and we\'re going to look for submit
event. And then instead of just doing function like we\'ve done in the
past, I\'m actually going to have a named function here called, what did
I call it over here? I called it handleFormSubmit. That\'s going to be a
function that runs when this form is submitted. Now I need to define
that function, function handleFormSubmit. And this function we\'re going
pass in the event object and do event.preventDefault, there we go.
That\'ll prevent the default submission of the form. You might wonder
why at this point I\'ve opted to create a named function here as opposed
to just the inline function. And it could be an inline function,
there\'s no reason why it couldn\'t but this function is actually going
to do quite a number of things. It\'s going to be a longer function. I
think it makes sense, I think it\'s a little bit easier to read in the
long run if this is a separate function, since it\'s going to be a
little bit longer. And that\'s just my own personal choice and my own
style, you could certainly use an anonymous function here and not have a
named handleFormSubmit function for this particular project, right?
That\'s what I like because what we\'re going to do here if we go back
and look at this is, this is going to extract out the value from each
form field. We\'re going to clear out all the form fields. When you\'ve
filled in the form and submitted it, you need to clear out these form
fields so that you\'re ready to make another card and then we\'re going
to run a function that creates the new card. And then if needed, meaning
there\'s not already a card over on the right-hand side of the interface
we need to change the header at the top of that destination list and
then actually add the card. And you can go back to the flowchart from
the previous version of this from part one and actually see how that\'s
going to all come together in the flowchart there. Yeah, we start with
event.preventDefault to keep the normal submission of the form from
happening but then we\'re going to do all of these things.

# 4.19 Vacation Destination Project: JavaScript -- Part 2 {#vacation-destination-project-javascript-part-2 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image155.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.0699781277340334in"}

The first thing on our list of tasks to do, is to get the values out of
the fields from the form. And, to do that, we can create a variable for
each of the four form fields. The name, the location, the photo and the
description. And then go and get the value out of those from the actual
form. And you\'ll remember over here when we created this form, in the
HTML, we made it such that these fields were required. So if you try to
click add list without filling in anything, it\'s not going to do
anything because of that required thing. At least if you\'re using
chrome or modern browser. And we can get more into form validation and
making sure you get good data into forms in the second course in the
specialization. But, for right now, we just want to do something quick
and simple, and we\'ve got enough there to sort of keep it from it least
being empty, even though we\'re not doing very much for that. And what
we\'re going to use here is we\'re going to use event. The event target
will be the form submission, right. Because that\'s the event target or
the form itself. And then we can get the elements property, and pull out
each one of these elements out of the form and its value and put them
into a variable here. The dot elements refers specifically to form
elements, and you could come over to the MGM and look at HTML form
elements dot elements, and find out more about what this is. But it will
get you a specific set of elements specifically from forms. And so,
it\'s kind of a helpful little, property here, that we can use to get
specific elements out of out of a form and get that data. So let\'s go
ahead and put that onto our script. So over here, I\'m going to do for
desk to nation. Name equals events. Target the elements, square bracket
because which element to my going to get name. That\'ll get me the first
one. Now I could just copy this and paste it destination location. If I
could select this, Destination location is going to be the location
field, And then I\'m going to paste again. Destination photo Is going to
be the photo field and then paste one more time. And then we\'ve got
destination description, Which is going to be the description field.
Actually, in a short this down, truth is down. Yes, see? And then,
don\'t forget I forgot this already. We need to get the value, so we
need to add value to each of these. Okay, on this one here, too, should
have done that initially. But there we go. That\'s going to do the first
part that\'s going to go in and into our form when it submitted and get
the values out of those fields that somebody typed in, and put them into
these variables here.

# 4.20 Vacation Destination Project: JavaScript -- Part 3 {#vacation-destination-project-javascript-part-3 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image156.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4559831583552056in"}

The next thing we need to do in our list of things to do once we\'ve
captured the values from the form is to remove them till the form is
ready for a new thing.

![](./images/media/image157.png){width="5.0in"
height="3.0699781277340334in"}

I\'m just going to use a for loop here to loop through the elements of
the form, and set the value back to empty. Down here you can see I\'ve
got just \"\", I\'m setting it back to empty. Let\'s go ahead and add
this as the next thing that this function needs to do here. For, here\'s
my for loop. For, and I\'m going to have just a counter variable, var i
equals zero, while i is less than detailsForm.length; i++, there we go.
That loop is going to go through detailsForm. Remember, detailsForm is
going to get everything inside of detailsForm there. Then what I can do
in here is I can very easily say, detailsForm.elements. square bracket
i.value equals \'\'\'\'. We\'re going to go through the detailsForm. I
starts at zero, and the first time through the form, it\'s going to say,
\"Get Element 0 from that form and set its value to empty.\" Then we\'re
going to increment i from zero to one, and if there\'s more than one
element in the form, then we\'re going to go through and do that again
for Element 1, setting its value to zero. We\'re going to do that for
each element in the form until the form is completely cleared out. It\'s
just a very simple for loop that\'s going to loop through and clear out
each of the elements in that form. We\'ve taken care of the first two
items on our list. We gathered the information from the form and cleared
the format. The third thing to do is to run a function that creates a
new card. We\'re going to hold off on that because we need to write that
function. But we can take care of the fourth thing, which is to check to
see if we already have a card in the other side, and if we do one thing
and if we don\'t, we won\'t, we\'ll do a different thing. We can take
care of that in terms of the header over there, and in showing, in
determining what this header says here. Either it\'s going to say enter
destination details, where we\'re going to change it so that it has
something like my wish list in there, because that makes a little bit
more sense once there\'s something in that column over there. Let\'s do
that really quickly. We\'re going to make a variable. We\'ll just put in
create card here, so we remember we need to come back and do that. But
I\'m going to have var wishListContainer equals document.getElementById,
and you\'ll remember we had an Id called title specifically so that we
could do this. Over here in the HTML you\'ll remember we have 10-year
title on that Id, so getElementById title. Then we just need a little if
statement here. I realized I did the wrong thing here. I don\'t want the
title here. I want to get this Id down here, this destination container.
That\'s the thing I want to check for. Destination container, because I
want to see if we\'ll do the title in a minute. If
wishListContainer.children.length is exactly the same as zero, so if
there\'s nothing in this container. Over here we\'ve added a card in
here temporarily, we\'re going to get rid of that. But if this container
is empty, then we\'re going to do something. If it\'s empty, then we\'re
going to say, document.getElementById. Now we want the title. Its
innerHTML is going to be, what did I put in there? \'\'My Wish List\'\'.
There we go. That will take care of the fourth thing, which is, if we
haven\'t added a card in there before, it\'ll change the title over on
the right-hand side there.

# 4.21 Vacation Destination Project: JavaScript -- Part 4 {#vacation-destination-project-javascript-part-4 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image158.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4559831583552056in"}

A var, it gets the data from the form fields, and then clears them out.
We have a placeholder for a place where the function that creates new
card is going to go and we\'re going to write that next. Then we check
and see if the header on the right-hand side of the page, if there\'s
already a card in there or not. If there isn\'t, we\'re going to change
the text inside that header over there. Then finally the last thing that
we\'ll do is actually add the card. Let\'s move on here. We\'re going to
create a new function called createDestinationCard. It\'s going to take
four parameters, and these parameters are the data that come in from the
form that somebody filled out. Let\'s go ahead and do that first. Down
here I\'m going to create a new function. Function
createDestinationCard, and it\'s going to take name, location, photo, I
think I just did desc for description. It\'s going to take those as
parameters, although they don\'t get quotes on them. Name, location,
photo, and description. That\'s right. Good. We\'re going to pass those
variables in. Actually, I\'m going to change this a little bit. I\'m
going to actually make this photoURL, and I\'m going to type out
description over here. There we go. Then I need to make var card, and
this is going to be assigned document.createElement. We\'re going to
create a div, and then we\'re going take that card, and we\'re going to
set the className equal to card, I think. Yeah, card. If you wonder
where we\'re going here, you can go over to the index file here because
we\'re basically going to use JavaScript to create these elements and
put them in the card. Now, we\'ve just created this div here and given
it the class of card. That\'s what we\'ve done. This is going to be a
long function because you have to create each one of these elements
individually and put the content in them and then add them to the card.
But it\'s not that long, but it\'s useful to see how this can work.
We\'ve got that. Next, we\'re going to add the image. First thing we
need to do is make a var called img or image or whatever you want to
call it here. I\'m just going to call it img. Then from there I\'m going
to do equals document.createElement, and we\'re going to create an img
in our element. Then images really should have an alt attribute, so I\'m
going to say img.setAttribute alt. I\'m just going to set it to name.
Whatever gets passed in as the name of this location is going to get set
as the attribute for the alt tag. If somebody\'s using a screen reader,
they will still be able to know what it\'s a picture of even if they
can\'t see the picture if they\'ve got a visual disability of some sort
or another. Great. We\'re setting that attribute. We need to set the
source based on what comes in through this photoURL here. We want to be
able to set that photo source, but the photo source is not required. The
first thing we need to do is determine whether or not a photo has been
brought in. Before that, we want to just make a variable var, and I
think I called this constantphotoUrl. I\'m going to make that equal to
images/signpost.jpg, because that\'s the image that\'s in this folder
over in here. Then I just need to see if photoURL, that variable there
that gets passed in, did somebody actually add a URL in there? We know
that it has to be URL in there because over here in our form, we set
this to type URL, so it\'ll only take a URL. Otherwise you\'ll get
Chrome barking at you and telling you that you didn\'t put in a URL. We
put URL in there and if we want to actually got put in because it\'s
optional. If photoURL.length is greater than zero, I think that\'s what
I\'m doing. No, actually I want to check and see if it\'s exactly the
same as zero. If it\'s exactly the same as zero, then what I want to do
is I want to set the img.src equal to this constant photo here. I want
to set it to that. I want to set the image source to that. That should
work. On my slide I use setAttribute again, so maybe I\'ll do that just
to make sure. But really this should actually work just fine. But let me
just put this in just so it matches what I\'m doing on my slide there.
SetAttribute src is going to be this constant photo here,
constantPhotoUrl. If that length isn\'t exactly zero, the else will be
okay, we\'re going to do image setAttribute to not constant. For this
source table, we\'re going to say its a photoURL. If somebody put in a
URL for a photo, it will get set to that. Otherwise, we\'ll use the
default one that\'s in there. This is unhappy about something here. I\'m
not sure what I\'ve done wrong. I\'m sure it\'ll come up sooner or
later. I\'m not quite ready to test this yet even though I\'m picking up
that there\'s an error on my script somewhere, but we\'ll find it in a
minute here. But this should work for now, and then we\'ll pick this up
in the next video.

# 4.22 Vacation Destination Project: JavaScript -- Part 5 {#vacation-destination-project-javascript-part-5 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image159.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4559831583552056in"}

This function is getting long, and it\'s going to get longer because
we\'re creating all of these elements here. If you look over here on the
index file, what we\'ve created so far of our card is we\'ve created
this div, and we\'ve created the image. Next we need to create this div
for the card body and then add into that the h3, the h4, and then the
description text. The description text is actually optional. If you come
up here, you\'ll notice there\'s no required on the text area there.
We\'re going to have to deal with what happens if that\'s empty as well,
and then we\'ll have to add the remove button as well but let\'s go
ahead and continue forward with this. Over here the next thing we need
to add after the image is a variable for the card body. We\'re going to
make a variable card body and create element div and then set the class
name to card body for that, and that will create that card body element
here and then next we need to do the same with the h3 and the h4.
Here\'s the h3 and I\'m just going to paste it in. You\'ll have to type
it, but I made var card title, document create element h3s. I\'ve
created an h3, and then I\'m setting the inner text to the name. Again,
this is the name that came through from the form. That\'s what\'s going
to get put in there, so that\'s going to be the name. I\'m going to
append child card title. I\'m putting the actual card title into the
card body here, and then we\'ll do the same thing with the subtitle. Now
I can add in the subtitle, and again I\'m going to paste this in, so you
don\'t have to watch me type it because it\'s getting painful for
everybody. But I\'m going to make a variable card subtitle and create
element h4, and then I\'m going to set the inner text to the location.
That\'s this location that\'s getting passed in here. That\'s the
location that somebody typed in on the form and so that\'s going to get
set for the inner text there. I\'m taking card body, and I\'m appending
the child card subtitle. That\'s going to add this to the card. I\'m
appending that in there. I\'ve got a card body, and I\'ve appended in
the h3 and the h4. Next step is to check and see if somebody typed
something into the description because it could be empty potentially,
and we\'ll put that in next. Again, I\'m going to paste this in so that
I know that it\'s right. But here we go. If description dot length is
not zero meaning it\'s longer than nothing then we\'re going to make a
variable card text and create a paragraph, and then we\'re going to take
the class name and set it to card texts because again over here,
remember we did that. We have p class card text. I\'m setting that class
name in there to card text. We could start with specifically if we
wanted to and then setting the inner HTML to description and then
appending that card text to the card body again. We get that appended
in. The next thing we need to add is the remove button. I\'ll put that
in here. Here I\'ve got a variable called card delete button, and I\'m
creating a button, and I\'m setting the inner text to remove and that
will create that button and set the for it to remove. But then I need to
add an event listener. I\'m going to add an event listener, so that
button is going to create an event listener, and I\'m going to add an
event listener called removed destination. We\'ll write another little
function that will actually remove this destination. But I\'m putting an
event listener on this button right now as soon as I add it, and it\'s
going to have its own event listener that\'s going to run a function,
and then I take that button and I append it. Append the card delete
button to the card body. Again, if we come over here and look at the
HTML here, you can see that this button called remove has been added to
this card body. The card body includes four items the h3, the h4, the
paragraph and the button. It only includes the paragraph if somebody
types something in that field, but it includes the button and the button
has an event listener on it. That will run a function that we haven\'t
written yet, but it\'s there. That\'s going to put all of those things
on there. Now the next thing we need to do is take this card. We\'ve
been building up this card body, so we need to take this whole card body
and add it to the card because we added the image to the card. We
created the image, and we set its attribute, and we set its photo. Maybe
we didn\'t add that to the card. We need to do that too, and then we
created the card. We need to add the image to the card as well, but we
need to add the card body to the card too. Since I forgot to add the
image let\'s do that first. Here we\'ve got the image in place. In here
we need to add card, append child image so that we\'ll put the image on
the card. Down at the bottom here, we need to add append child card
body, and then we just need to return card. That\'s going to take this
card object or this piece of HTML that we\'ve created that has all this
stuff in it and return it. This is a long function that makes all of
these elements and returns that card which should be a big piece of
HTML. Well not a very big piece of HTML, but a piece of HTML that\'s
this card here, div class card and in it will have the image, either the
signpost image or one that somebody entered a div called card body and
an h3 and h4 possibly a paragraph if somebody typed one in and a button
and then that gets added on there, and then it gets returned. Great,
we\'ve got all of that in place. Let\'s save this, and I\'m going to
pick it up in the next.

# 4.23 Vacation Destination Project: JavaScript -- Part 6 {#vacation-destination-project-javascript-part-6 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image160.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4559831583552056in"}

\[MUSIC\] The next step in this process is to actually write the
function that removes the card. And that\'s what this is going to look
like here. We\'re going to make a function called removeDestination.
We\'re going to pass in the event object so that when you click on that
button, the remove button that event gets passed through, the event
object gets passed through. I\'m going to say variable card
event.target.parentElement.parentElement. So when you click this button,
I need to go up to this parent and then to this parent and say
card.remove. So, I have to get up to that parent to actually remove that
card. So I\'m going up one parent to another parent to remove the card.
So let\'s go ahead and add this function over here. So down here I\'ve
got function removeDestination, and it\'s going to take an event object.
And I\'m going to say var card = event. No, yeah, you then, what did I
say here? Yeah, that\'s right. event.target.parentElement.parentElement.
So that\'s going to be card. Once I get all of all the way up there, I
could do card.remove. And that removes that card from the dog, we hope.
Okay, cool. So, we\'ve got our remove destination function that\'s going
to take in that event and then go up and actually remove that one, and
that will get called here if you click on the cardDeleteBtn. Okay, cool.
So we\'ve got all of that in place. The last thing we need to do is kind
of put it together. Up here you\'ll remember we had to things that we
needed to do. We needed to create the card, and then down here, we
needed to actually add the card. So, let\'s do these two things and then
we\'ll be able to finish off this script here. So to create the card,
what we\'re going to need is make it variable destination card, and
that\'s going to run. This is going to be using a function expression
here. So we\'re going to use a function expression to create the
destination card passing in these variables, so let\'s do that.
DestinationCard, actually, I\'m going to shorten it down to just
destCard = and then what I\'m actually doing is this thing here, create
the destination card. So I\'m going to put that in here,
createDestinationCard. But what I\'m passing in is the destination name,
and I\'m passing in the destination location. I\'m passing in the
destination photo to the photoURL, oops. And I\'m passing in the
destination description. And then that should var, that\'s going to
create, it\'s going to go in and create that and then down here now I
just need to add destination card. So that\'s going to say, okay,
destination card\'s going to actually hold that card. And remember, this
function returns HTML, so that HTML for the card is now in destCard.
Because remember that\'s what this dysfunction does, create destination
card down here at the end, it returns the card, which is the HTML for
all the stuff in the card. So now all of that stuff, all that HTML we
created is now in this little variable right here, it\'s in this bucket.
Okay, so the last thing we need to do is go in and find our container
and upend the child, right? So let\'s go ahead and do that,
document.querySelector. And what are we looking for, we\'re actually
looking for this id here. \' Go get that id .appendChild. And what are
we adding? We\'re adding destCard. All right, cool. All right, great.
Now we\'ve gotten all five pieces of our script together, and in the
next video, we\'ll do some error checking and fixing of stuff and see if
it all works.

# 4.24 Vacation Destination Project: JavaScript -- Part 7 {#vacation-destination-project-javascript-part-7 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image161.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4559831583552056in"}

All along as I had been working on that script, I knew that there was an
error on it somewhere, but I didn\'t have a chance yet to test it.
Usually you want to test scripts a little bit sooner than that. But I
could tell that there was an error here, because of this one. Let\'s see
what it is. Often, you\'re going to have errors in your scripts, and
that\'s completely normal, and you want to be able to find them. I\'m
glad that that\'s in there. We come over here. If I just refresh this
page, and then run the inspector, you can see up here there\'s an error
of one. If I look down here, it says in line 3, missing parentheses
after argument list. Let\'s go take a look at that, and see if we can
determine what\'s really wrong there. Because sometimes those error
messages are a little bit cryptic. If I come in here and go to line 3,
I\'ve got my addEventListener. I don\'t think I\'m missing a parenthesis
here, but I do notice that I should have a comma here. I think that that
will fix this whole thing. A lot of times scripts won\'t work. You may
feel like, \"Oh my goodness, I\'m completely in a quagmire of misery
here.\" But you could be really close, because I think if I put in that
one comma, it will work. If I\'m off by one comma, that\'s pretty
normal, and can be frustrating sometimes, but that\'s the way life is
when you\'re working with JavaScript

or code in general. But let\'s see now if it actually works. If I come
over here, and refresh this thing. I still have an error. Cannot read
property of null on line 3. Let\'s see what else do I have here on line
3. HandleFormSubmit. What I\'m getting here is this, cannot read
property of null, and usually that means something is misnamed
somewhere. If I come back here and look at this, I think the problem is
here. It\'s saying, I can\'t put an event handler on nothing. That\'s
it. The null means there. I think the problem is here,
destination_details_forms. I don\'t think there\'s supposed to be an S
on the end of that. Let\'s come over here and check that if I have my
form here. It should be this ID here. It\'s always best to just copy and
paste these just to make sure they are exact. But it\'s really just the
same thing without the S. Let\'s give that a try. Now, I don\'t have an
error. I should be able to test this out. I\'m going to put a name of a
destination. Let\'s try Boston. Let\'s try Fanuel Hall, I got that
spelling wrong. I\'ll do Fenway Park. Destination location, I will do
Boston. Provide a photo. I\'ve got a photo here, for URL. I can put in a
description here, and click \"Add to the List\". Now, I\'ve got it.
Cannot read property of zero, of undefined in line 14. Let\'s go back
and see what\'s going on there. Also, while I\'m here, I should probably
empty out down here. I should get rid of this card. I don\'t need this
one here anymore. This one should come out altogether. Make sure you
don\'t get rid of too much. They should line up here. This div closes
down there, so make sure you\'re getting rid of just the div here. Like
so, make sure this one still closes. But let\'s go over to script of
line 14. I\'ve got a problem here, detailsForm.length, it\'s got a
problem doing that script there. I value equals zero. I see the problem
here is actually, this needs to be elements. Again, no S, off by one S.
Let\'s go back and test this. Now, I\'ve entered that out, so that
doesn\'t have anything in there at all. Let\'s do this again. Fenway
Park, Boston, put my photo in there, here is a description, Add to List.
Reference div is not defined on line 31. Let\'s go back and take a look
at line 31. Line 31 var card, document.createElement div. Hopefully you
can see right away what I did wrong here. It thinks that\'s a variable.
That needs to be in quotes, createElement \"div\", either single quotes
or double quotes, doesn\'t really matter. Good. Slowly we\'re working
our way down the script, clearing out errors. It\'s a long script to
test. Let\'s try it again. Now, let\'s do Fenway Park \[inaudible\]
Fenway Park in Boston. Maybe we\'ll get an actual thing here, Add to
List, and look there it is. We were able to add a card to the list. Now,
we can check and see, does the removed card function work? It sure does.
We can now add cards, and remove them from the list. Let\'s try it again
here. We\'ll do Fenway Park again. We\'ll do Boston. Put in the photo
that I have in my form already. Then what happens if we leave the photo
app? Let\'s do that. No photo in there. See if the regular photo shows
up. It does. So that\'s the default photo, and that\'s working. Let\'s
add another one. Over here, I did a quick search for New York. I found
this photo, right-click it, and open that photo up into a new tab.
Here\'s a photo that I can use. I\'m just going to copy that URL, and
come back here. Let\'s say destination name, Empire State Building in
New York. I\'m going to paste that URL in for that JPEG, and then add a
description, is visiting New York. Here we go, Add to List. You can see
that it\'s appended that card, it\'s added it to the list. So now I\'ve
got two here, and they\'re both working. I can remove either one. If I
remove this one, and that one will go away, and the New York one will
stay. Notice, that the header here changed as it was supposed to change.
Everything else is working. Here, in this little application we\'ve
created here, and it\'s not very sophisticated. It\'s only got a few
features, but we can add elements, and remove elements on the page
pretty easily with a little bit of scripting effort there. This is a
really great capstone project for the end of the course here. Now, our
last final pieces here, are to refactor the script down a little bit,
and use our best practices, and we\'ll do that in the next video.

# 4.25 Vacation Destination Project: JavaScript -- Part 8 {#vacation-destination-project-javascript-part-8 .unnumbered}

![](./images/media/image162.png){width="4.0in"
height="2.4559831583552056in"}

Now that we have a working project which is great, and we had some
errors and that\'s normal and I\'m glad they appeared here for me
because they\'ll certainly appear for you. It\'s very easy to end up
with little mistakes whether you spelled something wrong or use the
wrong ID. There\'s a lot of moving parts with little web application,
even one small like this. You have your HTML with IDs things you\'re
hooking into. You have the styles where there\'s different elements that
are affecting the way the page looks, and then in the script, you\'re
manipulating many times both of those things on the fly. Just for a
quick summary of the script here, where when you submit that form, what
we\'re doing is we\'re running this handle form submit function which is
getting the values out of the form, clearing out those values from the
form when it\'s done. Then going through and actually creating the
actual card, after that going in and fixing the header at the top of
that container, at this part of the page up here. Over here you\'re
fixing the header if we need to, after that, we actually put the card on
the page. The create destination card is a long function because we\'re
creating each one of these HTML elements manually or individually here
having JavaScript create those elements and put the contents inside of
them, and then add them actually to the DOM as they\'re needed. Plus we
have an extra function that allows you to remove a card so that\'s one
more extra piece of functionality that we have in this little
application. The last thing to do is to clean it up by adding a function
up at the top here to enclose the whole thing and then changing out the
variables. Again, we would just do open parenthesis and run an anonymous
function with its parentheses in its curly braces, and then one more set
of parentheses to make it run. This will run when the page loads. I can
move this down and I can stick in here, use strict. That will make sure
that I\'m not introducing any variables by accident in the global scope.
Then I could take everything that\'s in here, and stick it inside this
function here, and I may need to tab it in once. There we go, and that
should look good. That should still work the same as before we can test
it. Fenway Park, I can type Boston, let\'s go to this Boston link, and
that still works. That\'s great. We\'ve got that, and then the last
thing you

could do is go through and replace all the R\'s we\'ve constant lab.
They should be constant as much as possible. So we can just click const
there, come down through here, that\'s going to be const, that\'s going
to be const. All of these can be const. Now this one needs to be let
because that\'s actually in a loop. That\'s going to need to be let, and
then down here this can be const. That\'s containers, that\'s going to
be const. That\'s going to be const, that\'s going to be const, that\'s
going to be const, this one, and this one. If you\'re comfortable with
this now you can just start using const, to begin with rather than
coming through and doing this at the end, and that\'s certainly fine as
well. When you\'re new at this I think it\'s helpful to start with var
and then come in and add const as you need to or let. Again, let is for
if the value is going to change. Now use other values you\'re going to
change when the script runs. Just the one inside the loop. I think
that\'s the only one. I could be wrong. Let\'s just check and see if
I\'m wrong. If you are wrong, you\'ll get an error and you can fix it.
Just refresh this, type in Fenway Park one more time, Boston, and the
URL. Look at that it works great. Click renewals and it removes it.
Everything\'s working the way it should. This is really great capstone
project that brings together everything we\'ve done in this first

course of this specialization, and I look forward to seeing you in the
second course of this specialization where we\'ll get into jQuery and
creating all cool interactive elements on my pages.

# 4.26 Course Summary (0:57) {#course-summary-057 .unnumbered}

Congratulations, you\'ve made it to the end of our first course on
JavaScript, I hope you\'ve had a lot of fun with it. And I hope you had
fun doing it with me while I stand outside outside here in California in
this beautiful day, not that many miles away from where JavaScript was
invented over 25 years ago. But JavaScript is a lot of fun,

and you\'ve learned a lot, so you should give yourself a pat on the
back, and I hope you\'re excited about the projects we\'ve done so far.
Also, I hope you realize that there\'s a lot more to learn about
JavaScript and that you\'ll join us in the next course in the
specialization where we get into J Query. And we look at some of the
cool things

that we can do with the J Query library and some of the cool
interactions that we can make. So thank you for coming along this far
and I hope to see you in the next course.

# .the end. 1.14.24 1:58am {#the-end.-1.14.24-158am .unnumbered}
